# Introduction

As the 'financial fallout' of an inflation-driven nuclear winter fast approaches, we cling to the promise of a warmer spring, brought about by exciting new technologies and the familiar comfort of storytelling.

The cypherpunks have arisen --- individuals who believe privacy enhances, not detracts from, our place in society. Individuals who believe that with new technology, we can empower each other and ourselves, and de-power those who would see us live as nothing more than digital serfs.

Individuals who believe.

These tales, from established writers and emerging talents, imagine worlds that could be free but aren't, much like our own. As 21 Futures evolves from its bitcoin origins in Tales from the Timechain, we turn now to darker possible fates. Inspired by uncertainty, our writers hold the keys to brighter futures, if only we can survive the fallout.

From thought-provoking and funny to downright frightening, the stories in this anthology captured our hearts and minds. They grapple with the rise of surveillance capitalism, the erosion of privacy, and the struggle for economic freedom. Yet, amidst the dystopia, a glimmer of hope persists...these stories are not merely warnings; they are invitations to imagine --- and ultimately, to build --- a better future. We invite you to join us.

Infinite Debt, our top-prize story by Graeme Shimmin, asks its characters and our audience how far they might be willing to go to write off debt.

Proxy --- Temet Nosce, offers a body-horror experience that is as frightening as it is entertaining when the protagonist is transformed into a NoBody.

The Big Slash offers a glimpse of what post-AI life might be like, and our joint runners-up stories, We are Living Well and Supplying The Slugs offer a more fantastical edge to the collection.

Underworld reveals a terrifying vision of government surveillance and the cypherpunk freedom fighters who fight the system.

Special thanks to Max Hillebrand for sponsoring this volume and contributing his work.

And so the Konsensus Network team, the editors, and the authors take on the role of doomed Prometheus, passing the fire of hope and the future to you, dear reader.

This is a short story collection for those who can see what's coming, and choose hope instead of fear.

Enjoy.

--- Alexander Boast & Philip Charter, Editors

Alex Boast --- Editor\| [\@alex_boast](https://x.com/alex_boast)

Alex is a web3 writer, ghost writer and ghost story writer. He's a novelist and poet from England who loves to work with other writers as a coach, mentor and friend. You can find him on [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/alexboast/).

Philip Charter --- Editor\| [totallyhumanwriter.com](https://totallyhumanwriter.com)

Philip Charter is a full-time writer and part-time cat herder. As well as writing for bitcoin founders and companies, he runs the 21 Futures fiction project.

We were never prepared.

