# Chapter 4: **A Unified Theory of Money**

Descriptions regarding the definition and origin of money tend to separate themselves into two primary economic camps, with various sub-camps around them.

One primary camp is the commodity theory of money, and in the opposing primary camp is the credit theory of money. The prior chapters of this book referenced both, and this chapter discusses more specifically how the two theories can be reconciled.

In Western economic literature, the commodity theory of money stretches back at least to Aristotle's *Politics* in Ancient Greece; was elaborated upon and popularized in Adam Smith's *Wealth of Nations* in 1776; and then was developed in more detail by Carl Menger, Ludwig von Mises, and other economists that formed the basis of the Austrian school of economics in the 19th and 20th centuries. The primary concept presented by this theory of money is that barter is inefficient due to needing to satisfy the double coincidence of wants, and therefore a highly salable good that is resistant to debasement (e.g., gold or silver) naturally arises in a society as a unit of account, medium of exchange, and store of value to reduce the frictions of commerce. In his book *Principles of Economics*, Carl Menger argued:

> Money is not an invention of the state. It is not the product of a legislative act. Even the sanction of political authority is not necessary for its existence. Certain commodities came to be money quite naturally, as the result of economic relationships that were independent of the power of the state.[^64]

The credit theory of money is more recent in terms of full exposition, stretching back to Henry Dunning Macleod and Georg Friedrich Knapp in the second half of the 19th century, and is often put forth as a counter to the commodity theory of money. Alfred Mitchell-Innes concisely elaborated on this theory of money in the early 1900s, and John Maynard Keynes was influenced by this theory and incorporated it into his economic prescriptions.[^65] Modern Monetary Theory, which was formulated by Abba Lerner in the 1940s[^66] and revitalized in the 1990s by economists such as Warren Mosler, Bill Mitchell, and Larry Randall Wray, further expanded on this way of thinking.[^67] It was then followed by the popularity of anthropologist David Graeber's writings on the history of debt, which generally took a favorable view of the credit theory relative to the commodity theory. The key theme of the credit theory of money is that credit is at the core of what money is, rather than commodities being at its core. In "The Credit Theory of Money," the second of his influential essays in the 1910s, Alfred Mitchell-Innes summarized:

> Shortly, the Credit Theory is this: that a sale and purchase is the exchange of a commodity for credit. From this main theory springs the sub-theory that the value of credit or money does not depend on the value of any metal or metals, but on the right which the creditor acquires to "payment," that is to say, to satisfaction for the credit, and on the obligation of the debtor to \"pay\" his debt and conversely on the right of the debtor to release himself from his debt by the tender of an equivalent debt owed by the creditor, and the obligation of the creditor to accept this tender in satisfaction of his credit.
>
> Such is the fundamental theory, but in practice it is not necessary for a debtor to acquire credits on the same persons to whom he is debtor. We are all both buyers and sellers, so that we are all at the same time both debtors and creditors of each other, and by the wonderfully efficient machinery of the banks to which we sell our credits, and which thus become the clearing houses of commerce, the debts and credits of the whole community are centralized and set off against each other. In practice, therefore, any good credit will pay any debt.[^68]

What complicates the rivalry between these camps and the discussion around them today is that they are inherently prone to politicization. Economists with a preference toward a small role for government tend to gravitate toward the concept of money being a bottom-up emergent phenomenon. To the extent that the state may be involved in issuing currency at all, proponents of this view will generally argue that the state's creation of currency should be constrained by something of natural scarcity, such as by the backing and redemption of specific amounts of gold. On the other hand, economists with a preference toward a larger role for government tend to gravitate toward the concept of money being a top-down product of the state, or at least something that is inherently tied to sociopolitical organization in its many forms. The state, according to many proponents of this line of reasoning, should not be bound by natural scarcity and should instead have a high degree of flexibility for the supply of the currency that it issues, to achieve its various goals.

As the first chapter in this book about hunter-gatherer societies discussed, both the concept of commodity proto-monies and the concept of credit stretch back to the earliest and most basic human interactions. Both the commodity theory of money and the credit theory of money contribute to a holistic understanding of the definition and origins of money at a foundational level. By comparing these different lines of reasoning, we can define money in the most broad and precise way possible.

**Setting the Timelines Straight**

To reconcile these two opposing theories of money and identify the underlying foundation, we must begin by exploring their differences, and what each theory seems to get right and wrong.

For this exercise, we can go back to the *Wealth of Nations*, where Adam Smith described the problem of barter and why a highly salable commodity money naturally arises to solve that problem:

> But when the division of labour first began to take place, this power of exchanging must frequently have been very much clogged and embarrassed in its operations. One man, we shall suppose, has more of a certain commodity than he himself has occasion for, while another has less. The former, consequently, would be glad to dispose of; and the latter to purchase, a part of this superfluity. But if this latter should chance to have nothing that the former stands in need of, no exchange can be made between them. The butcher has more meat in his shop than he himself can consume, and the brewer and the baker would each of them be willing to purchase a part of it. But they have nothing to offer in exchange, except the different productions of their respective trades, and the butcher is already provided with all the bread and beer which he has immediate occasion for. No exchange can, in this case, be made between them. He cannot be their merchant, nor they his customers; and they are all of them thus mutually less serviceable to one another. In order to avoid the inconveniency of such situations, every prudent man in every period of society, after the first establishment of the division of labour, must naturally have endeavoured to manage his affairs in such a manner, as to have at all times by him, besides the peculiar produce of his own industry, a certain quantity of some one commodity or other, such as he imagined few people would be likely to refuse in exchange for the produce of their industry. Many different commodities, it is probable, were successively both thought of and employed for this purpose. In the rude ages of society, cattle are said to have been the common instrument of commerce; and, though they must have been a most inconvenient one, yet, in old times, we find things were frequently valued according to the number of cattle which had been given in exchange for them. The armour of Diomede, says Homer, cost only nine oxen; but that of Glaucus cost a hundred oxen. Salt is said to be the common instrument of commerce and exchanges in Abyssinia; a species of shells in some parts of the coast of India; dried cod at Newfoundland; tobacco in Virginia; sugar in some of our West India colonies; hides or dressed leather in some other countries; and there is at this day a village in Scotland, where it is not uncommon, I am told, for a workman to carry nails instead of money to the baker's shop or the ale-house.
>
> In all countries, however, men seem at last to have been determined by irresistible reasons to give the preference, for this employment, to metals above every other commodity. Metals can not only be kept with as little loss as any other commodity, scarce any thing being less perishable than they are, but they can likewise, without any loss, be divided into any number of parts, as by fusion those parts can easily be re-united again; a quality which no other equally durable commodities possess, and which, more than any other quality, renders them fit to be the instruments of commerce and circulation.[^69]

As we look back on this excerpt centuries later, Smith's overall description aged well, and he got quite a bit correct. First, he described commodity money as a naturally emergent phenomenon to address the difficulty of satisfying the double coincidence of wants in a world of labor specialization. Second, he reasoned why precious metals specifically stood the test of time for this function better than other commodities --- their unique properties. It wasn't by accident, in other words, that cultures all around the world trended toward gold and silver as the ideal forms of commodity money.

Amusingly, the bottom-up natural emergence of SoJ rings as money in *Diablo II*, as described in Chapter 2, served as an observable experiment of Smith's proposal regarding the origin of money. This, along with similar examples, allowed the process to be witnessed first-hand rather than merely theorized upon. The game developers of *Diablo II* created their in-game environment, and millions of players assessed that environment and quickly and naturally gravitated toward SoJ rings as the primary form of savings, payments, and unit of account to avoid needing to satisfy the double coincidence of wants (i.e., the problem of barter) when exchanging high-value items, which was not the intention of the developers. A key limitation of this environment was that the game was played by people around the world who mostly didn't know each other, and thus the mechanism of credit could not generally be used. In a world of strangers with little or no existence of credit, commodity money indeed emerges naturally from individual participants in the marketplace, and the commodity money that rises to the top is whatever has the best attributes for being money.[^70]

However, anthropological evidence from after Smith's time has shown that he likely got one notable thing backwards: Barter between specialized workers did not predate money in the way that he assumed. There was never a time where it was common for specialized workers like butchers and brewers and bakers to find their potential exchange to be "clogged and embarrassed" due to the concept of money not having been developed yet. The concept of money in some form had already been developed by the time that specialized forms of labor like butchers and brewers and bakers came into existence. Specifically, flexible social credit had already partially avoided the need to satisfy the double coincidence of wants between people who knew each other. The concept of credit is older than coinage and rivals the age of the earliest collectible proto-monies such as shells.[^71]

In the broadest possible interpretation, the idea of debt and credit stretches back earlier than our species. When one ape picks insects off the back of another, and then they reverse positions to reciprocate, that represents a very short-term form of debt and credit. The ape who received the treatment first could fail to reciprocate. Humans of course expanded this greatly in terms of complexity and duration of the types of credit and debt that are available within a social structure.

Alfred Mitchell-Innes, in his 1913 essay "What is Money?" reversed Smith's order of events in the following way:

> Adam Smith's position depends on the truth of the proposition that, if the baker or the brewer wants meat from the butcher, but has (the latter being sufficiently provided with bread and beer) nothing to offer in exchange, no exchange can be made between them. If this were true, the doctrine of a medium of exchange would, perhaps, be correct. But is it true?
>
> Assuming the baker and the brewer to be honest men, and honesty is no modern virtue, the butcher could take from them an acknowledgment that they had bought from him so much meat, and all we have to assume is that the community would recognize the obligation of the baker and the brewer to redeem these acknowledgments in bread or beer at the relative values current in the village market, whenever they might be presented to them, and we at once have a good and sufficient currency. A sale, according to this theory, is not the exchange of a commodity for some intermediate commodity called the \"medium of exchange,\" but the exchange of a commodity for a credit.
>
> There is absolutely no reason for assuming the existence of so clumsy a device as a medium of exchange when so simple a system would do all that was required. What we have to prove is not a strange general agreement to accept gold and silver, but a general sense of the sanctity of an obligation. In other words, the present theory is based on the antiquity of the law of debt.
>
> We are here fortunately on solid historical ground. From the earliest days of which we have historical records, we are in the presence of a law of debt, and when we shall find, as we surely shall, records of ages still earlier than that of the great king Hamurabi, who compiled his code of the laws of Babylonia 2000 years B.C., we shall, I doubt not, still find traces of the same law. The sanctity of an obligation is, indeed, the foundation of all societies not only in all times, but at all stages of civilization; and the idea that to those whom we are accustomed to call savages, credit is unknown and only barter is used, is without foundation. From the merchant of China to the Redskin of America; from the Arab of the desert to the Hottentot of South Africa or the Maori of New Zealand, debts and credits are equally familiar to all, and the breaking of the pledged word, or the refusal to carry put an obligation is held equally disgraceful.[^72]

In other words, throughout his essay Mitchell-Innes argues from anthropological evidence that flexible social credit had already partially solved the problem of barter and reduced the frictions of commerce between neighbors at the hunter-gatherer stage --- meaning well before the time that specialized labor reached the point that Smith described.

The brewer and baker can get meat by making a promise to pay later, most likely via the products that they produce (e.g., "thanks for the meat, here's a credit claim for five loaves of bread, which you can trade to someone else if you want to and I'll honor whoever redeems it."). Likewise, the butcher can obtain beer and bread by making a promise to pay later, and many of their exchanges can net out. A butcher who owns a claim to some bread due to having sold some meat to the baker could easily sell that claim for bread to someone else. The utilization of credit solves the problem of barter between people who have a degree of continuity and trust between each other, or that both defer to a local authority that can enforce the credit.

Instead, commodity money emerges time and time again mainly to reduce the frictions of commerce between strangers, or to augment and improve systems that rely on flexible social credit by serving as form of final settlement and longer-term savings. People within the same social group can get by up to a certain level of complexity on small and informal human-controlled ledgers, whereas strangers benefit from being able to perform final settlement on the spot. And that's where commodity money is needed to replace or augment flexible social credit.[^73]

If we use ancient Babylon in the time of Hammurabi as one of the earliest examples, they used grain and silver as commodity monies, but also used clay ledgers to maintain the concept of credit. Grains are, after all, highly seasonal commodities. A farmer would get by on credit to buy various things until harvest season, at which time he could (hopefully) settle his debts in one big season by reaping and selling his harvest. In addition, studying hunter-gatherers and archeological evidence shows the widespread use of informal honor-and-kin-based credit systems as well as collectibles such as shell beads being used as proto-money, which means that both credit money and commodity money in various forms existed prior to strong forms of labor specialization.

**Where the Credit Theory of Money Goes Wrong**

Proponents of the credit theory of money were right to explore the anthropological evidence regarding the concept of credit and to critique early proponents of the commodity theory of money in terms of what they claimed to have been the order of events. Credit is indeed near the origin of commerce and money, rather than something that came along later, and this observation is a useful correction to *The Wealth of Nations*. Human interaction is, at its very core, a series of formal or informal credits and debits to others and is organized by rituals and rules that are tied to our evolutionary instincts, our earliest religions, and our earliest governing structures.

However, proponents of the credit theory of money tend to take their concept too far, often disregarding the importance of commodity money entirely, and generally painting too optimistic of a picture of a society's ability to govern a flexible, credit-based ledger at a large scale over long periods of time.

As an initial point of critique, we can point toward the troubles that niche merchants would have in such a credit-based system. The butcher, brewer, and baker may be able to hand out claims in convenient exchangeable units (such as one pound of beef being equivalent to three pints of beer being equivalent to five loaves of bread), but what about niche high-value service providers like surgeons? If a surgeon buys some bread, does she hand out a claim to draw upon her surgery services later? How many loaves of bread is a surgery worth, and what type of surgery? Surgeries are high-value niche services that are not very fungible or commonly needed. It becomes clear that a small unit of account is required to make trading more convenient, and historically such a unit was often linked to a specific commodity such as a few grams of silver or one meal worth of grain. Otherwise, they'd be reduced to abstract barter, trying to trade around all sorts of different credit claims for goods with no standardized unit of account. Historically, even when credit was used as the actual trading instrument, that credit instrument would usually be denominated in a salable commodity unit that arose naturally due to its properties.

As a second point of critique, we can ask: What happens if someone leaves one community and joins another? There is hardly such a thing as a truly closed community; communities have been interacting with others since the dawn of humanity. For wealth to be transferable between communities, it needs to exist in some more physical or universal form. Credit can work within a community for daily trade, but for anyone that desires to travel further out, they require wealth in a more fundamental form that would be recognized by a new community.[^74] Natural monies serve as a linkage between what are otherwise closed and circular credit ecosystems.

As a third point of critique, it should be intuitive that what works on a small scale does not necessarily work on a large scale. Small social credit systems based on honor and individual dealings between known individuals cannot be applied in the same way to nation-states that involve the governance of millions of people who are mostly strangers to each other. The concept of trust only works if you know and trust the person in question. Honor as a concept is incredibly important for human interactions but does not scale well in an impersonal bureaucracy.[^75]

Mitchell-Innes argued in his 1914 "Credit Theory" essay that our money would appreciate if we were to de-peg it from gold:

> We imagine that, by maintaining gold at a fixed price, we are keeping up the value of our monetary unit, while, in fact, we are doing just the contrary. The longer we maintain gold at its present price, while the metal continues to be as plentiful as it now is, the more we depreciate our money.[^76]

Of course, quite the opposite occurred. As of this writing, the U.S. dollar and the U.K. pound sterling lost over 98% and 99%, respectively, of their exchange rate relative to gold since they were de-pegged from gold in the decades after Mitchell-Innes' essay. For most countries it was an even bigger drop, and currency devaluation relative to gold happened to every country that ever launched a fiat currency.

Despite this major failure of prediction, the reasoning that Mitchell-Innes used in 1914 to make his claim was not far-fetched on its surface. He argued that it was not arbitrary debasement *per se* that was at the root of the historical devaluation of state-issued money, but rather that it was war, plague, and other destroyers of productivity that led to debasement. If only we could repeatedly emphasize peace and organization, he argued, our state-issued money would resist debasement:

> It is not King Jean or King Philippe or Edward or Henry who have been the depreciators of money, but King War, the great creator of debts, helped by his lieutenants, plague, murrain and ruined crops - whatever, in fact, prevents debts from being punctually discharged. It is not recoinage acts which have been the restorers of the value of money, but Peace, the great creator of credits, and upon the invariable truth of this statement the credit theory of money must largely depend.[^77]

On that point, he was largely correct. Aside from examples of unusually corrupt or mentally ill rulers, a king does not generally wake up one day and whimsically decide to devalue his realm's coinage with cheaper metal for no reason. War, plagues, and other destroyers of productivity are indeed at the root of why kings usually end up debasing their money. To remain in power, rulers seek to strengthen their political position, placate their subjects, and smooth over problems that inevitably arise throughout their reign. Currency devaluation is a method that a king can resort to so that he can make increased payments without having to increase taxes for those payments, and therefore the cost instead gets pushed, over time, onto those who accept the newly devalued coins at their old face value despite not having the same metal content or supply scarcity that they used to have.

However, what Mitchell-Innes missed, I contend, was that the ability to debase the money *contributes* to the likelihood of war and several other forms of damaged productivity occurring in the first place. The temptation for a ruler to debase coinage is too great to overcome, because it's usually the path of least resistance when faced with a problem. If the king knows that paying for a war by outright raising taxes would likely lead to revolution, but that paying for the war via gradual debasement of coinage will not, he can justify paying for his war by relying on that second method. If he and his potential war opponent were both stuck with the first method of paying for a war with extra taxes rather than debasement, the war might not happen because their subjects might revolt if it did. The costs of the war would be more transparent and unpopular right away. In contrast to this, the ability to debase coinage to pay for a war allows the war to happen first and the costs to be partially delayed, which increases the probability of war happening and increases the scale to which it may occur. If debasement *can* occur, it eventually *will* occur for any number of reasons. The possibility for debasement exists, always and everywhere and invitingly so, as something a government can turn to whenever it can't spend transparently on what it wants to.

Over the long arc of time, from a saver's perspective it will almost always be better to hold a scarce commodity money directly than to hold the promise made by a kingdom, empire, or nation-state indefinitely. The former is subject to the firm laws of nature, while the latter is subject to the fallibility of mankind.

We can see the flaw in Mitchell-Innes' reasoning more clearly when he describes credit as being the most valuable kind of property in his "What is Money?" essay:

> A first class credit is the most valuable kind of property. Having no corporeal existence, it has no weight and takes no room. It can easily be transferred, often without any formality whatever. It is movable at will from place to place by a simple order with nothing but the cost of a letter or a telegram. It can be immediately used to supply any material want, and it can be guarded against destruction and theft at little expense. It is the most easily handled of all forms of property and is one of the most permanent. It lives with the debtor and shares his fortunes, and when he dies, it passes to the heirs of his estate. As long as the estate exists, the obligation continues, and under favorable circumstances and in a healthy state of commerce there seems to be no reason why it should ever suffer deterioration.[^78]

The flaw is that "under favorable circumstances and in a healthy state of commerce," is quite the assumption to make over the course of a lifetime, let alone over generations. Through the course of life and governance, problems inevitably arise, and various debts are inevitably devalued or discharged or defaulted on. During the past century, during which time currencies have spent most of their time decoupled from the natural scarcity of precious metals, a "first class credit" has been one of the worst possible assets to hold compared to the alternatives. In dozens of countries around the world since Mitchell-Innes' essays, credits and their underlying currencies were outright hyperinflated away. In the most successful countries, who were on the winning side of all major wars and had strong financial institutions, first-class credits generally avoided the fate of hyperinflation but still greatly underperformed real estate, business equity, precious metals, fine art, and fine wine.[^79]

In other words, proponents of the credit theory of money, when applying their analysis to a sufficiently large governing body, generally rely on the assumption of having an unbroken chain of highly competent and altruistic administers of the public ledger. That is an assumption that has gone unrewarded time and time again, in culture after culture, century after century. By hand-waiving away precious metals or any sort of natural constraint as an unnecessary or clumsy way to maintain discipline of the public ledger, they miss a key aspect of why commodity monies have stood the test of time for thousands of years: because nobody can instantly make more of them even when they have a seemingly good reason to do so. Plus, they represent final settlement rather than perpetual reliance on the promises of centralized entities.

Interestingly, despite making his various claims about money, Mitchell-Innes was indeed quite aware of the fact that, in all financial history, human-defined monetary units always structurally *depreciate*, and never seem to structurally *appreciate*. As he wrote in "The Credit Theory of Money,"

> But while the monetary unit may depreciate, it never seems to appreciate. A general rise of prices at times rapid and at times slow is the common feature of all financial history; and while a rapid rise may be followed by a fall, the fall seems to be nothing more than a return to a state of equilibrium. I doubt whether there are any instances of a fall to a price lower than that which prevailed before the rise, and anything approaching a persistent fall in prices, denoting a continuous rise of the value of money, appears to be unknown.[^80]

In this way, we can compare centralized human-controlled ledgers to the second law of thermodynamics. This law states that entropy (which is basically a scientific term for "disorder") of any closed system can only increase over time; it can never decrease. Nothing short of a perfectly efficient system, with no friction and no heat loss (which doesn't exist) can avoid the continuous growth of entropy. Similarly, nothing short of an unbroken chain of perfect rulers can maintain a flexible monetary system without debasement, and such a perfect chain does not exist. Problems inevitably arise in every realm, and time and time again authorities inevitably turn to the creation of more currency to soften those problems and devalue various debts in a non-transparent way.

David Graeber, who for the most part can be placed in the credit theory camp, observed the relationship between the level of societal trust and the type of money in use in his book *Debt: The First 5000 Years*:

> As a result, while credit systems tend to dominate in periods of relative social peace, or across networks of trust (whether created by states or, in most periods, transnational institutions like merchant guilds or communities of faith), in periods characterized by widespread war and plunder, they tend to be replaced by precious metal.[^81]

In his book, Graeber tended to describe precious metals in negative terms most of the time, and for example made the case that one of the reasons precious metals were used during times of war is because they were plentiful due to plunder. Soldiers from the winning side of a war would plunder all sorts of precious metal savings and ornaments from the vaults and temples of the losing side, and then spend that plunder into broad circulation, either directly or through the creation of more coinage.

However, a more neutral analysis can emphasize the changing level of trust in society. In times of reliable social ledgers and relatively stable supply and demand of goods and services, the role of credit can expand more easily since it is convenient. In contrast, in times of unreliable social ledgers and unstable supply and demand of goods and services, credit is risky and prone to default or devaluation, while precious metals maintain their scarcity and desirability and can therefore be turned to as a preferred medium of exchange and store of value.

**A Unified Theory of Money**

Rather than adhere to the commodity theory of money or the credit theory of money to the exclusion of the other, a more complete theory must find the underlying logic or foundation that both theories share. And what they share is that they both represent ways to maintain a ledger, but with different maintainers of the ledger.

In the credit theory of money, humans maintain ledgers using methods that rely on trust. In small groups, this can be done informally, and be based on kinships and friendships and honor-based relationships. In large groups involving strangers, credit-based ledgers are maintained by a centralized administrative state and the rule of law and are historically subject to various resets and devaluations when problems or imbalances inevitably arise.

In the commodity theory of money, humans use a trust-minimized method of letting nature and its physical laws maintain the ledger. The physical exchange of highly salable commodities is what settles the ledger on the spot between non-trusted entities, and the full state of the ledger at any given time is maintained by physical possession. No human authority can debase the money merely with the stroke of a pen. Instead, they must use force to convince people to hand it over, or they must expend the resources to find and produce more of it through mining.

Therefore, the unification of both theories can be described as a "ledger theory of money" since it describes the deeper logic or foundation on which both theories rest. Both flexible social credit and collectible proto-monies stretch back to the dawn of humanity. Both involve groups of various sizes maintaining a ledger between themselves to avoid the need to satisfy the double coincidence of wants, to reduce the friction of beneficial exchange, and to serve as a form of liquid savings. The differences come down to which authority is trusted to maintain the ledger.

In contexts where trust is high, such as within a small group or within a well-functioning centralized state, people feel comfortable using honor-based or written legal ledgers for their payments and savings. These ledger systems tend to have a high level of convenience and efficiency but are prone to long-term degradation and occasional massive defaults or restructurings. In contexts where trust is low, such as between separate groups or when trusted ledgers have recently failed, people rely on trust-minimized ledgers such as commodity monies for payments and savings instead, even at the cost of less convenience and efficiency.

A ledger theory of money observes that most forms of exchange are improved by having a salable unit of account that can be held and transferred over both time and space, and that this unit of account implies the existence of a ledger, either literally or in the abstract. These monetary units and the ledger that defines them rely either on human administrators or on natural laws to maintain their stability across time and space.


## Footnotes

[^64]: Carl Menger, *Principles of Economics*, 262.

[^65]: John Maynard Keynes, "A. Mitchell-Innes. *What Is Money?*"

[^66]: Abba Lerner, "Money as a Creature of the State."

[^67]: Dylan Matthews, "Modern Monetary Theory, explained," *Vox*, April 16, 2019.

[^68]: Alfred Mitchell-Innes, "The Credit Theory of Money," 152.

[^69]: Adam Smith, *Wealth of Nations*, Book I, Chapter IV, 37--39.

[^70]: See for instance Narayana Kocherlakota, "Money is Memory"; Stefano Ugolini, *The Evolution of Central Banking: Theory and History*, 165--175.

[^71]: David Graeber, *Debt: The First 5,000 Years*; George Selgin, "The Myth of the Myth of Barter."

[^72]: Alfred Mitchell-Innes, "What is Money?" 391.

[^73]: Ugolini, *Central Banking*, 169--171.

[^74]: Brian Albrecht and Andrew Young, "Wampum: The Political Economy of an Institutional Tragedy"; Lawrence White, *Better Money: Gold, Fiat, or Bitcoin?*, 17.

[^75]: Seabright, *Company of Strangers*, 86; Avner Greif, "The Fundamental Problem of Exchange," 261--62.

[^76]: Mitchell-Innes, "Credit Theory," 160.

[^77]: Mitchell-Innes, "Credit Theory," 157.

[^78]: Mitchell-Innes, "What is Money?" 392.

[^79]: Òscar Jordà et al., "The Rate of Return on Everything, 1780--2015."

[^80]: Mitchell-Innes, "Credit Theory," 159.

[^81]: Graeber, *Debt*, 215.

