# Chapter 5: **Proto-Banking and the Hawala System**

Banks as we think of them in their modern form originated in Italian city states at the dawn of the Renaissance, but the history of proto-banks stretches back thousands of years to various regions of the world. Banking, in the broad sense, is a series of legal and technological layers that people developed on top of commodity money.

The Code of Hammurabi, a Babylonian legal text from nearly four thousand years ago, has sections that provide laws for loans and deposits.[^83] The Book of Deuteronomy allows the charging of interest on foreigners but not to fellow Israelites.[^84] Ancient Greece had a form of proto-bankers over 2,500 years ago called trapezites, named after the trapeza tables they used.[^85]

A notable development in the history of formal credit was the suftaja and its various pre-cursors. The suftaja was a letter of credit used throughout North Africa, the Middle East, and along the Silk Road by Muslim and Jewish merchants stretching back at least to the eighth century. It arose as a useful development because merchants needed a way to prevent theft or increase efficiency when moving money over long distances, and/or to be able to delegate the transfer of funds to a messenger on their behalf.[^86]

Ghislaine Lydon, a history professor with an emphasis on African and Middle Eastern studies, documented the history of the suftaja in her 2019 research paper, "Paper Instruments in Early African Economies and the Debated Role of the Suftaja." In the paper, she described the suftaja as the following:

> As a form of debt contract, the suftaja enabled the transfer of funds among merchants located in distant markets who performed services as international money lenders within established trade networks. The suftaja served essentially two purposes. First, it was a means to send payments or settle debts across long distances; a function akin to a wire transfer. Second, like a traveler's check, it facilitated travel unencumbered by hefty and bulky amounts of cash.[^87]

She went on to provide an example:

> A merchant is traveling on business by caravan between Awdaghust and Sijilmasa. To safeguard his capital he purchases in Awdaghust a suftaja in exchange for a fee from Merchant A who has a relative and/or business partner, Merchant B, located in Sijilmasa. A priori, merchants A and B have established ex-ante a relationship of trust, involving the exchange of long distance financial and commercial services. The traveler deposits his capital with Merchant A, in the presence of witnesses, pays a fee, and receives in exchange a suftaja. This document, often in the form of a letter, instructs Merchant B to pay to the traveler the exact amount of capital. Upon arrival at destination the traveler cashes in the check. The same device was used to make long-distance payments except that the letter, containing the payment instructions, traveled via messenger. Upon reception, Merchant B executed the payment to a third party. A suftaja payment by Merchant B could settle in full or in part a pre-existing debt owed to Merchant A. Viewed another way, as was often the case among legal scholars discussed below, the traveling merchant or the party seeking to make an international payment, gives a "loan" to Merchant A that was reimbursed or disbursed elsewhere by his associate Merchant B to either a traveler or a fourth party. Since Merchants A and B regularly correspond and transact, their financial balances are cleared in the course of such bilateral exchanges.[^88]

Lydon, citing available literature on the subject, dates the word suftaja back to the 8th century when used in this way by Muslim and Jewish merchants in the Middle East and parts of Africa. She also cites numerous examples of Ancient Egyptian papyrus-based debt contracts, stretching back to at least the 3rd century B.C. that are likely to have been precursors to this specific method of exchange. She also cites an example of a 4th century A.D. document used between Uzbekistan and China along the Silk Road that served as a transfer document. And there exists significant literature about the development of the hundi in medieval India, which was their term for a bill of exchange.

As for the common denomination of money in the suftaja, Lydon points toward precious metals:

> The dinar was the most common international denomination among medieval Muslims, and it featured prominently in suftajas. Dinars had minting and market specificities, including Maghribi and Baghdadi variants, and were pegged to the local price of gold.[^89]

The development of papyrus-based (and eventually paper-based) bills of exchange in time broadened into a form of proto-banking called the hawala system, which traces back over 1,200 years to early Indian and Arab traders. Although the system approximately followed the timing and geographic spread of Islam, stretching from Africa on one side, up to parts of Europe, through the Middle East, and onward to India on the other side, the system was (and still is) used by both Muslims and non-Muslims.

Hawala is a decentralized network of specialized money brokers, called hawaladars, that operate based on trust and reputation. The system still exists today, using modern technology of emails and phone calls, and processes hundreds of billions of dollars in volumes per year.

The way the system works today is that a "Person A" can go to a "Hawaladar A," and give them money and a password, specifying a "Person B" that this money should be given to. Separately, Person A tells Person B the password (via email or other communications), and Hawaladar A contacts a "Hawaladar B" in another country where Person B lives and gives them the password (also via email or other communications). Finally, Person B can go to Hawaladar B, tell them the password, and they will be given the money by the hawaladar. The hawaladars charge a small fee for this service. Person A has effectively sent money to Person B internationally, despite no money flowing over the border, and without going through any formal banks. The hawaladars just updated a channel-based ledger between themselves. Hawaladar A now owes Hawaladar B the money, which they can settle later. These hawaladars know and trust each other well despite operating over long distances, or know and trust each other indirectly through fellow hawaladars, and thus they can maintain credit with each other in a way that non-trusted parties can't.

In earlier times, the communication channels would have been physical, such as one merchant giving another merchant a password or specifically written paper as part of a trade of physical goods, rather than carrying large amounts of coin with them. Hawaladars could also travel with the merchant or spread the password through a network of shorter trips. These days, the communication happens over the internet.

In this system, Person A and Person B don't have to trust each other, but they do have to trust the hawaladars. The hawaladars also must trust each other, and specifically Hawaladar B must trust that Hawaladar A is good for the money, since Hawaladar B paid out money to person B and is now owed that money by Hawaladar A. The reason this trust-based system works is that the hawaladars are professional merchants and they survive in this profession because of their reputations. If a hawaladar fails to settle a valid transaction, he'll no longer be trusted by fellow hawaladars, and will no longer be part of the network.

Hawaladars can settle money over long distances with each other more safely and more efficiently than regular people can settle money. They deal with large numbers of transactions and can "net" transactions. For a medieval example, Hawaladar A might send a note worth ten gold coins for Person A, and a now owes those ten gold coins to Hawaladar B who paid out the money to Person B. The next week, perhaps Person C comes to that same Hawaladar B, and asks them to send six gold coins to Person D, through Hawaladar A. Hawaladar A now owes only four gold coins to Hawaladar B, since the six gold coins can be netted out from the prior ten gold coins that were sent in the other direction. Perhaps they perform dozens of these back-and-forth transactions per year and settle once at the end of the year via a secure process of one physical settlement. The same example could be denominated in dollars, rupees, or other units.

This system allows payments to move long distances, while the money itself moves much less frequently. Collectively, these hawaladars form a decentralized ledger and channel-based payments system, which normal users of the network can access through their local hawaladar. Nobody knows or keeps track of the full network ledger; there is no master hawaladar that they all report to. Instead, it operates by individual hawaladars keeping accurate books for their individual channels with other hawaladars, along with reputations in the broader region so that each hawaladar is known by many hawaladars.

Within the 21st century, the hawala system has primarily been used for international remittances and is typically done with fiat currency units. It bypasses the formal banking system including international border frictions and provides basic bank-like services for unbanked people. For example, an Indian migrant worker in the United Arab Emirates may wish to send some of his earnings back to his family in India and can use the hawala system to do it.

In some countries today, the hawala system is discouraged or outright illegal since it is a way to transfer funds anonymously and across borders. It has been associated with terrorism in some contexts because terrorists will indeed use whatever tools are available to them, although the system itself stretches back to medieval times. In other countries like the United Arab Emirates the practice is allowed and regulated, and as a result the UAE serves as a hub for the modern-day version of the network.

It has been a challenge for historians to determine the precise etymology and exact chain of events regarding specific words or technologies for paper-based forms of exchange. One of the cited reasons for the lack of clarity is that medieval Muslim scholars often debated and discouraged the usage of suftajas and/or the broader hawala system due to its usage of debt and arbitrage, despite it being centered primarily throughout their regions. Therefore, in many contexts the system was off the record. In a 2007 paper with an extensive list of citations called "Misplaced Blame: Islam, Terrorism, and the Origins of Hawala,"[^90] Edwina Thompson cites Richard Grasshoff when classifying the relationship between hawala and suftaja:

> Grasshoff demonstrates that hawala refers to the legal concept of delegation of debt, rather than to a concrete application, while the term suftaja, by contrast, refers to a bill of exchange as one of the possible commercial instruments based on hawala. \[\...\] Technically speaking, it could therefore be argued that customers operate at a level of the suftaja, while dealers more accurately operate a hawala-based system.[^91]

Eventually, economic and military contact between Muslim and Christians spread the usage of these and related monetary technologies to Europe. In a report by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta called, "The Evolution of the Check as a Means of Payment: A Historical Survey," the authors Stephen Quinn and William Roberds describe the spread of payment technologies as follows:

> Checks appear to have been in common use in the eastern Mediterranean during the first millennium. By the tenth century, checks were widely used in the Muslim world (Ashtor 1972). In contrast, monetary systems in Europe at this time were extremely primitive. There were few coins of reliable value and no banks, much less checks (Usher 1934; Spufford 1988).
>
> During the Crusades, Europeans came into increased contact with the Muslim world and came to adopt, with modifications, the banking and monetary systems they encountered in the eastern Mediterranean. During the thirteenth century, rudimentary banks appeared in commercial cities such as Barcelona, Florence, Genoa, and Venice. The primary purpose of these banks was to facilitate payments among local merchants rather than to provide credit.[^92]

Along these lines, the Catholic order of warrior monks of the 12th century known as the Knights Templar seem to have adopted these practices.[^93] The Knights Templar, based in Jerusalem, operated an extensive network that assisted the crusades by Christians against Muslims. European noblemen, intending to travel and fight in the crusades, could deposit valuables with the Knights Templar in Europe, receive a specialized note in return, and then redeem that note for an equivalent amount of value from a different group of Knights Templar upon their arrival in Jerusalem.

As this chapter ends, we'll finish with the question, "who controls the ledger?" The answer as it pertains to these systems is that the hawaladars (and various merchants, templar, and other channel-based proto-bankers) control the ledger. Users of the network must trust individual hawaladars to operate correctly, and individual hawaladars must trust each other.


## Footnotes

[^83]: Goetzmann, *Money Changes Everything,* 46--48.

[^84]: Edward Chancellor, *The Price of Time: The Real Story of Interest*, 5--6, 17--20.

[^85]: Goetzmann, *Money Changes Everything*, 82--83.

[^86]: Ghislaine Lydon, "Paper Instruments in Early African Economies and the Debated Role of the Suftaja."

[^87]: Lydon, "Paper Instruments," paragraph 21.

[^88]: Lydon, "Paper Instruments," paragraph 22.

[^89]: Lydon, "Paper Instruments," paragraph 29.

[^90]: Edwina Thomson, "Misplaced Blame: Islam, Terrorism and the Origins of *Hawala*."

[^91]: Thomson, "Origins of *Hawala*," 294.

[^92]: Stephen Quinn and William Roberds, "The Evolution of the Check as a Means of Payment: A Historical Survey," 2.

[^93]: History.com Editors, "Knights Templar," *History.com*, July 13, 2017.

