# Chapter 16: **Pricing as a Mechanism for Organization**

When a monetary system is analyzed, it must be analyzed from the perspective of both the issuers of the money and the users of the money, and those two groups have different goals.[^220] Most of this book is written from the perspective of the user, so let's take a moment to explore fiat currency from the perspective of the issuer.

A user typically wants to hold money that appreciates in value, that is easy to hold and pay with, that is private, and that is difficult or impossible to freeze or confiscate. A modern currency issuer, in contrast, generally wants to issue money that smooths out near-term volatility, that pulls demand from the future into the present, that is easy to surveil, that can be frozen or confiscated by authorities easily, and that gives the issuer a lot of flexibility to spend money even at times when nobody wants to finance them.

Strong periods of economic growth lead to greater production of goods and services but may also lead to greater speculation and leverage that tends to amplify the impact of that economic growth during the good period. In other words, people start offering too much credit, taking out too much debt, and investing into projects that (when analyzed in a more sober mindset) are unlikely to be successful --- which we can collectively call "malinvestment." Ultimately, the period of growth comes to an end, as speculation and leverage and malinvestment reach unsustainable levels. The situation, both economically and financially, begins to go into reverse. The leverage that exaggerated the upside of economic expansion now begins to exaggerate the downside of economic contraction. Plus, external shocks such as natural disasters or wars can also negatively impact the economy randomly, and cause some of this leverage to unwind at any time.

One question that many economists argue over is whether business cycles happen naturally or if central bank actions cause them to occur. My interpretation of history is that both are true to varying degrees, so we'll walk through both perspectives.

Imagine that you are a government analyst or policymaker. You study history and you notice that the economy tends to go through these ebbs and flows and faces various external shocks. Life is volatile, in other words, and groupthink tends to come in waves. Worse yet, economic recessions tend to feed on themselves and create a vicious cycle. When business revenue decreases, employers reduce jobs, and jobless people consume less, resulting in even less business revenue, which results in even more job losses. Having interpreted it this way, you propose that the government, being separate from the private sector thanks to an enforced monopoly on taxes and money creation, could soften these highs and lows. When the private sector is defaulting and/or refusing to allocate capital, the government could step in and allocate capital to important things anyway. When the private sector is booming and/or allocating capital poorly, the government could make credit harder to get and slow that type of euphoric malinvestment, while also increasing taxes and cutting spending to build a surplus of savings to cushion the next downturn. Therefore, from this line of reasoning, the best combination of economic prosperity would occur when the government works as a countercyclical force against the private sector: investing when the private sector fails to do so, and building a reserve when the private sector is investing too much and too haphazardly.

In other words, at least as far as this Keynesian vision goes, the government (and their central bank) take an active management approach to their currency. If the currency supply is inflating due to credit growth, they try to decrease the new supply of currency by running fiscal surpluses (via the government) and by raising interest rates to slow down commercial bank lending (via the central bank). If the currency supply is deflating, they try to increase the new supply of currency by running fiscal deficits and by lowering interest rates to accelerate bank lending. The goal for this whole process is for the money supply to grow at a smooth and moderate pace, without big contractions or big accelerations that destructively feed on themselves. The peaks and troughs of the private sector are dulled, and external shocks are smoothed over --- or at least that's the plan.

This theory works well on paper, assuming that government and central bank officials are more detached, intelligent, and/or long-term in their thinking than people in the private sector in aggregate, or at least that their incentives are more aligned with long-term planning. A problem obviously arises if they are not, and realistically that's usually the case. Authoritarian governments often have a clear lack of incentive alignment with their subjects. Democratically elected government officials, meanwhile, are focused on winning the next election. None of these lawmakers have an incentive to run a surplus now and slow down the economy to create a reserve of capital from which they could backstop a weak economy later. And if they were to try, they'd likely get voted out of office because people in aggregate always want less taxes and more services in the present. So, instead what happens in practice is that governments run moderate fiscal deficits most of the time, and bigger fiscal deficits during recessions and crises. Rather than a mix of fiscal surpluses and fiscal deficits, it's a mix of fiscal deficits and bigger fiscal deficits.

These nonexistent surpluses lead to a second problem. If the private sector in aggregate is financially constrained in a bear market, and the government has no surplus stockpile of savings from which to draw on, how will the government be able to borrow enough money to inject money into necessary parts of the economy? We already saw in a prior chapter of this book that the British government had trouble raising honest funds to fight World War I, and they were the issuer of the world reserve currency at the time. Wouldn't most governments run into trouble raising capital during a recession or war if private sector companies are also running into trouble raising capital, since most of the potential lenders are themselves either leveraged or risk-averse or without spare funds? In a fiat currency system, a government solves this problem by working with its central bank to create money out of thin air when needed. They can issue more bonds to spend more, and if the government bond market becomes illiquid due to lack of sufficient buyers, their central bank can create more base money to buy those bonds and, as the lender of last resort, re-liquify the government bond market. Therefore, the government and central bank together can inject brand new money into the economy. If they are not judicious with this approach, they have unlimited financing up to the point of causing runaway inflation.

In a gold-backed monetary system, where money inherently has a cost and no entity can create new base money for free, the government is just the largest entity out of many similar entities, and with a different mandate. In a fiat-based system, where currency is issued at no cost by the combination of the government and the central bank that it controls, they can dramatically expand the monetary base during recessions or wars and spend new money into the economy by diluting existing cash and bond savings. They can attempt to act as a countercyclical force on the private sector even when there isn't much demand for their government bonds.

During economic expansions, most people are employed, available labor is scarce, and therefore wages tend to rise. During economic contractions, wages fall or stagnate and there are plenty of people sitting around looking for work that can't find any. If the government can print money, devalue the savings of other people, and use that money to put unemployed people back to work during economic contractions, couldn't that smooth out and soften these economic cycles? Rather than having bank failures where some people lose a lot of money, why not soften the recession at the cost of everyone's savings being diluted a little bit? That type of thinking is how economists who endorse top-down economic management tend to perceive the risks and rewards of deciding to intervene.

Sometimes they go overboard with their stimulus and cause too much demand for goods and services, or external supply shocks occur that are too big to manage, and the grand designs of government officials and central bankers run into the inevitable difficulties in the real world. With too much money chasing too few goods and services, leading to the price inflation that follows, many central planners blame corporate greed as the problem rather than their own policies, and embrace price controls. If prices are going up after their creation of new money, why not just mandate low prices? That way, from their perspective, most of the costs of the stimulus will be put on corporations rather than the public. But of course, that causes all sorts of incentive problems: The corporations themselves have expenses, and to increase the supply of goods and services they need to have both a profit incentive to do so and the financial capacity to do so. Without both of those conditions being met, the supply of goods and services is more likely to stagnate.

On the other side of this viewpoint are the economists who view most business cycles as being caused by the central bank in the first place. Critics of this sort of centralized approach point out how --- repeatedly and nearly universally --- central bank policymakers wind up exacerbating the business cycles rather than smoothing them over. Their actions to smooth over a recession end up contributing to the next period of economic overheating that occurs, and their actions to subdue an overheating economy end up contributing to the next recession, and thus they get trapped into a constant loop of putting out fires that they themselves caused. A highly leveraged economy is a more fragile economy, and central banks are the key enablers of high systemwide leverage. This line of reasoning mostly comes from economists in the Austrian tradition, but in recent years even people from completely different backgrounds have been critical of attempts by the Federal Reserve to manage the growth rate of the economy. In early 2023, for example, Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren grilled the chairman of the Federal Reserve Jerome Powell with questions about his plans to rein in inflation by tightening monetary policy in a way that was intended to lead to a higher unemployment rate.

After the 2000 dot-com bubble rolled over, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates all the way down to 1%, which was the lowest level that rates had been for decades. They did this even though it was the mildest recession in decades --- both in terms of economic contraction and in terms of the unemployment rate. These ultra-low interest rates were unnecessary, and subsequently encouraged people to borrow money for real estate at cheap levels, including with adjustable-rate mortgages. From 2004 to 2006, after a lot of new debt was taken out, the Federal Reserve then began quickly raising interest rates, which started causing people to default on their mortgage payments. Rather than being any sort of countercyclical force, this big whipsaw in interest rates was a significant procyclical contributor, among many other factors, to the calamitous 2008 subprime mortgage crisis.

Similarly, during the 2020 COVID-19 crash, the Federal Reserve cut interest rates to zero and injected enormous amounts of liquidity into the financial system. When asked by a U.S. congressman about the potential for price inflation after such a large surge in broad money supply growth, the Federal Reserve's chairman Jerome Powell said that he doesn't see a high likelihood for serious price inflation, and that we may have to unlearn the importance of monetary aggregates.[^221] The Federal Reserve's official interest rate projections for several years out were very low, and the chairman infamously said, "We're not even thinking about thinking about raising rates."[^222] In late 2021, when price inflation was over 6%, the Federal Reserve was *still* holding interest rates at zero and expanding the monetary base to buy government bonds. When price inflation started to get out of hand in early 2022, the Federal Reserve admitted it was becoming a serious problem, and then completely changed their path of monetary policy to try to address it. They started rapidly reducing the monetary base by effectively selling bonds that they had previously bought (through the process of maturation), and increased interest rates at the fastest pace in decades, which went against what they had previously forecast that they would do. This rapid change in both money supply and interest rates sucked liquidity from small banks toward large banks and money market funds and led to massive unrealized losses by banks who had bought long-duration government-backed bonds in 2020 and 2021 at low interest rates. Ultimately, this rapid drawdown in liquidity contributed to the second-biggest bank failure in American history in early 2023, along with a string of other bank failures --- which forced the Federal Reserve to provide an emergency liquidity facility and take other actions to prevent further bank contagion from spreading through the financial sector. In addition, the Federal Reserve's higher interest rates led to higher interest expenses for the government, which meant larger fiscal deficits at a time when fiscal deficits were the driving force of inflation (rather than excessive amounts of bank lending).

Ultimately, I view this primarily through a lens of technology, especially as it relates to the significant gap in speed between transactions and settlements that has existed since the second half of the 19th century. Since central banks operate the primary ledger systems that the world uses for domestic and international commerce, then of course they are going to actively manage them, and therefore of course they will make plenty of mistakes. All the incentives are aligned in that direction, and so that's how it plays out in countries all around the world whether we like it or not. This is an inevitable condition that we find ourselves in, unless or until we develop and adopt a better ledger system.

**Price Stability vs Coordinating Signals**

An overarching goal of most central bankers is price stability. They're willing to rapidly expand or contract the money supply if it means maintaining price stability, which they define as a gradual loss of purchasing power. According to neoclassical economic theory that forms the basis of most central bankers' worldviews, price stability is inherently a good thing --- but is it? Our world is an inherently volatile place, and price changes give consumers and producers a constantly updating signal for which goods and services are scarce and which goods and services are abundant, so that they can adjust accordingly. Friedrich Hayek and other economists have emphasized this in their work.[^223]

Usually, consumers will use less of what is scarce and expensive and will use more of what is abundant and cheap. Conversely, producers will produce more of what is scarce and expensive and produce less of what is abundant and cheap. And generally this takes time; consumers and producers likely need to determine that these price changes are persistent before they change their behavior. Removing that volatility from the system with changes in the money supply and interest rates, or with outright price controls, reduces or eliminates that coordinating signal.

In many ways, this is a problem of information bandwidth. Ten million individuals have all sorts of varied and localized expertise, based on their knowledge of their profession, tailored to the region that they operate in. Each one is considering a small amount of real-time information and is continuously making decisions from that information based on experience, and this adds up to an enormous amount of coordinated activity. Does a small group of centralized, academic policymakers in a room located in their nation's capital --- akin to a council of elders --- have a better grasp on how to allocate their country's labor and capital than the millions of people do at the individual level?

Imagine a gasoline pipeline system that supplies various U.S. states with gasoline. One day, it encounters a mechanical problem, and stops supplying gasoline to an entire state. The supply of gasoline in that state suddenly becomes scarce, while demand for it is still significant, and so the price of gasoline spikes to very high levels.

Amid public outrage, the natural reaction for many lawmakers is to view this as unfair, and to try to set price caps on the price of gasoline. Should hoarders of gasoline be rewarded? Should wealthy people be able to access gasoline when working class people can't afford it? For many people, their conscience and intuition both say no, and thus they support top-down economic planning to spread the gasoline more fairly, with quotas and price controls and a reduction in the ability of individual consumer and businesses to make decisions to buy and sell gasoline at prevailing market prices.

But could that well-meaning policy ironically slow down the resolution to the problem, and hurt some of those who it attempts to benefit? If the price of gasoline spikes, then people who can't afford it or who don't need to afford it, stop using it. Very important use-cases (say, traveling nurses or the shipment of key goods) naturally continue to be paid for, and those buyers will absorb the cost or pass their prices down the supply chain to their customers, if applicable. Wealthy people also continue paying for it.

The higher that the price of gasoline in that state spikes, and the longer that it remains elevated, the more it incentivizes holders of gasoline in other states to take the gasoline they have, bring it to the state with a shortage, and sell it for a profit. If the price of gasoline only spikes by a small amount, it might encourage the marginal seller in bordering states to come in with some gasoline, but not much. On the other hand, if the price of gasoline spikes enormously and for a prolonged period, it encourages gasoline suppliers across a wider region to travel to that state with their spare gasoline and flood it with new supply until prices normalize. High prices serve as a signal to people throughout the surrounding area to bring in any spare gasoline to it, and therefore help fix the problem with additional supply until the pipeline is fixed. Simultaneously, high prices serve as a signal to consumers within the area to reduce their use of gasoline as much as possible for anything that is not critical.[^224]

In other words, the central planners' desire to quell short-term price spikes can ironically reduce the speed with which supply/demand imbalances are resolved by natural market forces. Artificially capping the price of gasoline results in shortages and reduces the area from which it makes sense for suppliers in other states to transport spare gasoline to that shortage state, and the urgency with which they might be interested in doing it. On the other hand, letting the private market work through the supply/demand mismatch can incentivize sellers of gasoline from longer distances to come and quickly supply more gasoline, which helps hammer down that supply/demand price gap.

This example is basically what happened to Europe in 2022, except it was natural gas rather than gasoline. Russia invaded Ukraine, and in the process, Europe lost most of its ongoing natural gas import capacity from Russian pipelines for geopolitical reasons. The price of natural gas in Europe spiked to unbelievably high levels, and so did the price of electricity which in significant part is generated by natural gas. In response, liquified natural gas exports from all around the world began changing course and prioritizing Europe as a destination, because that's where the highest selling prices were. Europe was subsequently flooded to their maximum import capacity with liquified natural gas. It also encouraged an acceleration of building new gas export and import terminals to expand the total capacity for future years. If Europe had implemented price caps, then there would have been no incentive for global liquified natural gas providers to re-route their supply there, and the supply-demand mismatch would have been worse, with acute shortages. Those high prices were painful, but they were also a signal to the entire world to coordinate and fix the problem over both the short term and the long term.

Suppose that ten million people in a country make economic decisions, and they each buy five things per day. That's 50 million transactions per day, or 18.25 billion transactions per year, nationwide. Can a central committee of elders allocate prices better than those ten million decentralized people can? Most evidence suggests no; ten million people can incorporate real-time information and allocate prices better than a detached central committee of a handful of individuals. That is why politburos are not the most efficient form of economic planning; regardless of how wise and intelligent those individuals may be, they are incapable of processing and organizing the amount of information that ten million everyday people can with their various specific expertise.[^225]

In their book *Bitcoin is Venice*, Allen Farrington and Sacha Meyers elegantly described pricing as an information compression mechanism:

> Provided with information, individuals can, and do, produce a price. But given a price, nobody --- never mind a third-party observer or even an entire market --- can reproduce the information that created it. And this is the whole point. The "function" from information to price is not random, not ill-defined, and certainly not an "aggregation." Rather, it is a very specific kind that serves a very specific purpose: It is the perfect compression of economically relevant information. It strips the noise of subjective values, preferences, and interpretations of reality down to pure objective signal, the same for everybody, and hence that the algorithm of the market can aggregate, entirely indifferent to its source or what went into its construction.[^226]

Pricing doesn't directly give you information on *why* it is the way it is. Pricing merely incentivizes you to act rationally in a rapid manner, regardless of whether you understand the details of the supply and demand situation or not. Price is the mechanism for how tens of millions, hundreds of millions, or even billions of people can unknowingly work together in relative harmony to fix a supply and demand problem, even without most of them understanding the nuances of the situation. They are quickly acting in unison on compressed, efficient, high-signal information, stripped of the details or the need to understand them. Meanwhile, as all of those people unknowingly work together to solve a problem in the near term, a smaller subset of participants with domain expertise can look more deeply into the problem and see what details might be causing the pricing that the market is experiencing. They can use that knowledge to help further solve the problem and make a profit, or share that knowledge with others who can.

The desire of central planners to override that natural coordination system of price might seem smart at first, but unless perfectly handled, it is likely to lead to mild, short-term gains but severe, long-term losses. By delaying the decentralized organization that naturally arises from this pricing information, central planners can improve prices in the near term, but likely end up delaying the fixes that need to happen on both the supply side and the demand side in order to achieve an abundant equilibrium.

That doesn't mean that government authorities must be inactive in the face of crisis, though; it just means that price controls are rarely an effective part of their response. Governments themselves can respond to price signals with mobilization of their resources toward a supply response. Examples such as bringing food and water to an area struck by a natural disaster or bringing fuel to an area struck by acute shortages are more in line with solving the underlying problem than various attempts to indirectly fix the problem through price manipulation. These solutions require the foresight to build and maintain reserves during good times.

**The Price of Money and a Reliable Measuring Stick**

We can extend the same concept of pricing as a coordination mechanism to the price of money itself, which central banks control. Central banks rapidly change the supply of money and/or the price of money to try to dull price signals, but I contend that such policies are usually more harmful than not.

In a decentralized system, the price to borrow money depends on multiple factors, including how creditworthy you are but also how abundant or scarce credit generally is at the time. If there are few people that want to borrow money relative to how much money lenders have, then lenders will likely be willing to lend at low interest rates and with attractive terms. On the other hand, if there are a lot of people that want to borrow money relative to how much money lenders have, then lenders will be strict with their lending standards and charge higher interest rates.

In a centralized system, central banks can create or destroy base money and (mostly) set the price to borrow wholesale money. For example, twelve people on the FOMC of the Federal Reserve heavily influence the price of money for 330 million Americans, as well as for billions of people in the world who indirectly are affected by the U.S. dollar as the world reserve currency. This can unnaturally increase the amount of loans that occur, or reduce the amount of loans that occur, depending on whether the price of money is set too high, too low, or just right. It can also hurt some regions more than others if they would naturally have had different market-based interest rates but instead are being forcibly offered the same interest rates.

Prior to the 2008 crisis, the Federal Reserve would change interest rate boundaries (the wholesale price of money) as its primary tool for transmitting monetary policy. After 2008, they began using changes in both interest rates and changes in the size of the entire monetary base (the supply of base money) for transmitting monetary policy, which (especially when done rapidly) is very disruptive for people, businesses, and banks trying to make contracts denominated in these units. Bank cash levels, for example, were rapidly whipped down in both 2019 and 2023 by the Federal Reserve, and this contributed to the 2019 repo spike and the 2023 bank liquidity problems respectively.

Centrally directed and rapidly created new money is basically a breach of contract for savers, who thought that the units they held would be reasonably stable. Conversely, centrally directed and rapidly destroyed existing money is basically a breach of contract for debtors, who took out debt in units they thought would be reasonably stable. It's not just a question of whether money should be hard or weak; it's also a question of how elastic, arbitrary, and rapidly changing its supply should be. In other words, it's a question of who controls the ledger, and therefore a question of who has the power to rapidly harm either savers or debtors when they determine that it's appropriate to do so.

Usually, fiat currency money supplies grow over time. A rapidly growing money supply usually distorts price signals, which can negatively affect the reliability of pricing as a coordination mechanism. Many central banks including the Federal Reserve have an official target of 2% price inflation per year. Price inflation, however, serves as a small and re-occurring error in our economic calculations. Many people choose to hold money in savings accounts or bonds that yield 2% per year, thinking they are getting a growth in purchasing power, while not realizing that price inflation is growing by 2% or more per year.

Imagine that you are a carpenter. You cut various pieces of wood, carefully and in relation to other pieces, to assemble various furniture products that you've designed. Now, imagine that all measuring devices that you use, and that you can buy, are shrinking by a small amount each month. Previously, a 30-centimeter piece should have been connected to a 10-centimeter piece. But now, when you measure your latest batch of 10-centimeter pieces, they are indicated to be 11 centimeters instead, because your ruler is smaller and no longer accurate. Now, you need to make those 30-centimeter pieces 33 centimeters instead to be proportionate, and thus you must change your equipment. If you had already cut a bunch of 30-centimeter pieces for your inventory, you're probably out of luck; there is no use for the combination of new 11-centimeter and legacy 30-centimeter pieces. Those 30-centimeter pieces are now impaired inventory.

That's kind of how price inflation, especially very fast price inflation, impacts an economy and specifically the productivity of people in that economy. Wherever possible, businesses make multi-month or multi-year supply agreements at fixed prices for both the products they sell and the products they buy. They need to factor inflation into their long-term contracts and business plans, including target inflation and any errors the central bank might make in achieving that target. If the products they buy suddenly get repriced higher, while they still have a fixed price contract for what they sell, then the business has a big problem; they may lose money on the work that they do. On the other hand, if they can raise prices for the products they sell, while locking in their suppliers at fixed prices for a while, then they can raise prices for consumers while hurting other suppliers and get a big surge of profit for themselves.

Additionally, salaried employees are often only able to negotiate their salary once per year, and thus must anticipate and account for inflation of the very units they are paid in as part of the process. Persistent inflation by default puts the employee at a disadvantage to the employer because wages tend to be sticky, due to anchoring bias.[^227] Merely to keep up with inflation of semi-scarce goods and services, an employee needs at least several percentage points of wage increases each year. To the extent that they gain experience and are worth a higher inflation-adjusted wage, that must be further negotiated. For example, if housing costs are going up by 5% per year, then an employee could reasonably make the case for 6% annual wage increases, which in most contexts will sound unreasonable to the employer. In reality, they're only asking for a 1% "real" wage increase for their increased experience, and the other 5% is just to keep up with housing inflation, but it doesn't feel like that to the employer. Due to this, employees often must change jobs unnecessarily just to reset the anchoring bias of their prior wage agreements --- which is counterproductive.

An extreme example of this is Egypt over the past decade. In autumn 2016 Egyptian authorities, practically overnight, devalued the country's currency by half relative to the U.S. dollar to meet IMF requirements for a loan.[^228] And then again in 2022 and 2023, they devalued their currency by half once more, in three big stepwise moves to meet conditions for another IMF loan.[^229] Each time this happened, it put the onus on wage earners to try to negotiate a doubling of their salary in Egyptian pounds, lest they receive a pay cut in international purchasing power terms. Of course, hardly anyone could even ask for such a pay jump let alone actually get one, and so most workers throughout the country received effective pay cuts, while at the same time seeing their liquid savings devalued.

When the supply and value of currency units are both relatively stable, it is easier to make long-term plans and contracts across the whole economy. Plus, it's easier for employees to keep their wages in line with purchasing power since anchoring bias is no longer working against them. On the other hand, when the supply and value of currency units are both highly variable, it's harder to make those long-term plans. If changes in the supply and value of currency are low enough, it's only a small problem. Much like how a carpenter might not care about the difference between 30 centimeter or 30.1-centimeter pieces of wood, a business might not care about the difference between \$5.00 USD and \$5.10 pricing for widgets they buy. It's just a small error source that is within the bounds of acceptability. However, if the widgets they buy start hitting \$6.00 USD or \$7.00 USD because the broad money supply is growing more quickly than usual, then that really messes up their profit margins and their planning, or that of their suppliers, or that of their employees.

In addition, for efficiency purposes a lot of contracts for sales, purchases, and labor wages tend to occur on 12-month or other long periods. It is inefficient to re-determine contract details every month, but that starts to become more important to do if prices are changing rapidly. Stability in the underlying currency is necessary to form long-term contracts, and long-term contracts help reduce administrative overhead and duplication. Even in shorter intervals, we can imagine the waste of time and resources if a restaurant must change its menu prices daily or weekly or monthly, rather than yearly or less often.[^230] And then we can imagine countless other small increases in administrative costs like that.

Almost without exception, if you look around the world for regions with persistent double-digit money supply inflation, those regions are not very economically productive. Instead, they tend to be in disarray. In that type of inflationary environment, it is hard for businesses to plan for the long run while remaining profitable, and it's hard for workers to maintain wages that keep up with the cost of living. All negotiations become harder and more frequent, especially if they involve a lot of people, such as unions and large contracts. Investors want to get their capital out to easier jurisdictions, which increases the cost of capital for local businesses, which makes them even less organized, less profitable, and less competitive. In this context, the public ledger is broken, and by extension everything becomes broken. It risks becoming a vicious cycle, because disorganization leads to inflation, and inflation leads to disorganization.

Sound money is like a measuring stick that never changes, or that changes extremely slowly and predictably. These types of environments for the most part tend to develop when nobody can change the measuring sticks. For example, if gold is money that both buyers and sellers accept, it's hard for centralized entities to come in and disrupt that arrangement and change prices. On the other hand, if centralized fiat currency ledgers are money, it's easy for the centralized issuer to change the supply and value of units on that ledger, which can disrupt price signals and business activities.

**The "Need" for Constant Price Inflation**

In 2013, James Bullard (president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, one of the twelve regional Federal Reserve banks) expressed his concern about inflation being too low. The Federal Reserve has a 2% annual price inflation target, and in 2013 they were undershooting it with inflation levels closer to 1.5%. Bullard supported ongoing expansion of the monetary base (printing new bank reserves to buy U.S. Treasury bonds), citing the lack of sufficient price inflation, and citing the need to defend the Federal Reserve's credibility in hitting its 2% inflation target rather than allowing prices to grow more slowly than that target.

This line is from *CNBC*:

> "If inflation continues to go down, I would be willing to increase the pace of purchases," Bullard told reporters after a speech at the annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference in New York.[^231]

And this line is from *Bloomberg*:

> Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis President James Bullard, who has backed continued bond purchases by the Fed, said it is important for the central bank to defend its 2 percent inflation target to ensure its credibility as price gains moderate.
>
> "I have been concerned about low inflation," Bullard, who votes on monetary policy this year, said in a speech today in Paducah, Kentucky. "There hasn't been much indication so far it is moving back toward target."[^232]

When Janet Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System from 2014 to 2018, was preparing to leave the position in late 2017 she looked back on her tenure and lamented allowing price inflation to remain too low:

> Janet Yellen looked back on her year at the Federal Reserve and figured most of the boxes are checked: Accelerating economic growth, a solid employment picture and a stable financial system.
>
> The one job left undone? Inflation.
>
> At her final news conference as Fed chair Wednesday, Yellen said the Fed's failure to bring inflation up to the central bank's 2 percent mandate is her single disappointment.
>
> "We have a 2 percent symmetric inflation objective. For a number of years now, inflation has been running under 2 percent, and I consider it an important priority to make sure that inflation doesn't chronically undershoot our 2 percent objective," she said.[^233]

For years throughout the 2010s, Christine Lagarde (who at the time was head of the International Monetary Fund) argued that Europe was experiencing too low inflation and needed to perform more accommodative and unconventional monetary policy to try to get inflation higher. These were her words from 2014:

> The head of the International Monetary Fund on Wednesday called on the European Central Bank to ease monetary policy to move prices higher, saying "low-flation" in advanced economies risked undercutting an already sluggish global recovery.[^234]

In 2019, when Lagarde was being considered to become the President of the European Central Bank (which she indeed became by the end of the year), she continued this theme of identifying too-low inflation as a problem in a speech to the European Parliament:

> The challenges that warrant the ECB's current policy stance have not disappeared. The euro area economy faces some near-term risks, mainly related to external factors, and inflation remains persistently below the ECB's objective. I therefore agree with the view of the Governing Council that a highly accommodative policy stance is warranted for a prolonged period of time in order to bring inflation back to "below but close to 2%".[^235]

Similarly, throughout the 2010s decade, Haruhiko Kuroda in his long-serving position as Governor of the Bank of Japan, kept interest rates at negative levels for a prolonged period in an attempt to raise inflation up to 2%. This line was from *Reuters* in 2018:

> Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda on Tuesday ruled out the chance of abandoning negative interest rates in the near-term, saying they are necessary to accelerate inflation to his 2 percent inflation target.[^236]

If we replace the description of an inflation target with a debasement target, which is ultimately what it is, it shows how silly some of these comments are. Using that terminology, rather than heads of central banks lamenting that inflation is below their target, they would be lamenting that the currency that people earn their wages in and keep their savings in is not being debased as quickly as their target debasement rate says they should.

In modern times, most developed country central banks maintain a 2% annual price inflation target and become concerned if inflation is significantly below the target or above the target. A 2% inflation target means that prices on average will double every 35 years. This is interesting, because ongoing productivity gains should make prices *lower* over time, not higher. Central bankers do everything in their power to make sure prices keep going up. To put this another way, central bankers do everything in their power to ensure that deflationary productivity gains are continually offset by a greater amount of currency debasement, so that nominal prices of goods and services keep marching higher at a slow and steady pace despite becoming more efficient to produce.[^237]

Price deflation is inherently a good thing. Throughout the 19th century, at the dawn of the age of oil and electrification and long-distance railroads, prices tended to be structurally deflationary. It became much easier to make things with so much extra energy, and there was an explosion of technological growth, productivity growth, human population, and human life expectancy. Similarly, the past several decades have seen a rapid reduction in the prices of electronics. Televisions, computers, phones, and other devices keep getting cheaper, usually on a nominal basis and especially on a quality-adjusted basis. The cost per gigabyte of computer memory, for example, has fallen exponentially for decades, and most people in the world have benefited immensely from this fact. Meanwhile, an 80-inch television today is clearer and cheaper than a 40-inch television was two decades ago.

And yet, deflation is often painted as a terrible thing by central bankers, and by mainstream economists more broadly.[^238] In their worldview, prices must continually go up rather than down. In fact, many of them argue that if prices go down, people will delay purchases indefinitely to wait for lower prices (even though we obviously don't do that with electronics). In their policy framework, prices must constantly go up, excess saving needs to be constantly discouraged, and people need to be kept on a constant treadmill of consumption and borrowing to support continual and smooth economic growth.

A key reason why policymakers and economists fear deflation is because deflation is bad for highly leveraged financial systems, and yet leverage is exactly what they encourage to exist through their policies. When everything is built on massive amounts of debt, and policymakers keep intervening to make sure debt levels go ever higher, then deflation can collapse the system if it's allowed to occur. Persistent deflation is not compatible with high debt levels, and thus not compatible with the modern financial system.

In a more equity-based and low-debt financial system, it's desirable for prices to go down. That much is obvious. Technology companies usually have low debt levels, and if they improve their products immensely (offering greater capability for a lower price), they get rewarded for it via large numbers of buyers, even as the per-unit cost decreases. For example, by lowering the cost of a gigabyte of storage by a thousandfold, they can sell a thousand times as many gigabytes of storage (e.g., full terabyte drives). The buyers, of course, also benefit from these technological improvements and price cuts.

However, in a highly indebted financial system where the money supply usually grows substantially over time, deflation is often caused by liquidity crises and recessions, and therefore gets assigned a bad reputation.[^239] As companies mature and grow more slowly, in an environment of persistent currency debasement and recurring liquidity support from central banks, they are encouraged to maintain permanent corporate debt in their capital structure, and this type of practice requires constant currency debasement to make sense.

Much like how bloodletting used to be an overused medical procedure that we now know only helps in certain specific contexts, I don't think future historians will look favorably on the current view among mainstream economists that we need constant price inflation and currency debasement for the economy to run well. A framework of constant inflation is primarily meant for 1) constantly promoting the use of credit rather than savings, 2) gradually but persistently devaluing debts, 3) constantly dulling the price signals that our volatile world gives to us to act upon, and 4) allowing governments to run persistent fiscal deficits as a form of non-transparent taxation. These goals primarily benefit those near the core of the system, such as the governments, corporations, and financiers.

This is further complicated by the fact that we can't even measure inflation precisely. The official government measure of inflation is a basket of goods and services that is weighted in such a way that it tries to replicate what the average person buys each year. It also assumes substitution, so for example if a ribeye steak goes up in price, it factors that out from the basket of goods and switches to cheaper ground beef, since that's the consumption pattern that the consumer, now facing higher ribeye prices, opts for. Therefore, the inflation measurement is programmed to avoid high-price items and keep resetting toward cheaper items, which ends up systematically understating inflation.[^240]

In 1913 when the Federal Reserve was created, there was \$19.31 billion in broad money. At the end of 2022, there was \$21.4 trillion (\$21,400 billion) in broad money, which is an increase of 1,118 times over, or an average of 6.6% per year when compounded for 109 years.

The population of the United States was 97 million in 1913 and about 333 million in 2022. This means that in 1913, there were 199 dollars per person in the system, and in 2022 there were over 64,800 dollars per person in the system. This is a per-capita broad money supply increase of 325 times over, or 5.5% compounded annually.

The scarcest things, such as luxury waterfront property and fine art from famous deceased artists, tend to go up in price as fast as the money supply does. That's because these things are truly finite, and we don't get more efficient at making them. As a result, as more money is created it pushes up the prices of those goods by nearly the same rate. As an example, one particularly well-documented Miami Beach waterfront property was originally sold for \$100,000 in 1930 and by 2022 was worth around \$30 million, which was a 6.4% compounded annual growth rate, and that was closely in line with the growth rate of the money supply over that long period.[^241]

Semi-scarce things such as gold, oil, beef, and median homes tend to go up in price at a 4-5% annual rate if money supply growth is 6-7%, because we get moderately better at producing them over time, due to better technology. A barrel of oil, for example, went from an average of \$0.95 in 1913 to an average of \$94 in 2022, which was only a 100-fold increase, or 4.3% compounded annually.[^242] The price of beef similarly increased at a 4.1% compounded annual rate from the 1930s through 2022.[^243]

Non-scarce things such as certain types of grains, seed oils, electronics, software, apparel, plastic toys, and similar items have a very low or even negative inflation rate. We have become exponentially better at making electronics and software and jeans and toys, and our mechanized agricultural and refinement practices have kept grain prices and seed oil prices very inexpensive.

Between 1913 and 2022, the consumer price index increased at a 3.2% compounded rate, and this index mostly represents a mix of semi-scarce and non-scarce things.[^244] Interest on bank accounts and Treasury bills failed to keep up with the consumer price index during that long period, let alone keep up with a basket of semi-scarce things like beef or oil or houses, and certainly did not keep up with truly scarce things like fine art or waterfront property.

Even just between the beginning of the year 2000 and the end of the year 2022, there was significant divergence. The broad money supply per capita grew at an annual compounded rate of 6.8% per year during that timeframe, while the official consumer price index grew at a 2.6% compounded rate.[^245] The gold price increased by 8.3% per year.[^246] The price of hospital services grew by 5.3% per year.[^247] The oil price grew at 4.7% per year. The median house price grew by 4.7% per year. Childcare prices grew by 4.2% per year.[^248] Average hourly earnings for non-supervisory workers went up by 3.2% per year.[^249] The average bank account had a yield of less than 2% per year.[^250] Apparel was flat in price. Electronics, plastic toys, and software of all sorts dropped in price.[^251]

The cheaper non-scarce categories of goods, which benefit from exponential technology gains or benefit from shifting manufacturing overseas toward cheaper sources of labor, help to lower the average official inflation number compared to the growth of the money supply and compared to the price growth of truly scarce and semi-scarce good and services. In the real world, however, exponential price declines in a few categories of discretionary goods don't offset the continually higher prices in necessities and desirables that have a real resource constraint, and that are continually driven up in price by the expansion of the money supply.

There was a heated exchange on this topic in 2011 when William Dudley, then president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, spoke to a partially working-class audience in Queens. When asked questions about recent food inflation (commodities had been in a significant bull market during recent years), Dudley pointed out that while energy and food prices may indeed be higher, that this was offset by other things. He pointed out, for example, that the iPad 2 helped bring down the average, which didn't go over well. As Kristina Cooke reported for *Reuters*,

> Dudley tried to explain how the Fed sees things: Yes, food and energy prices may be rising, but at the same time, other prices are declining.
>
> He then stretched for a real world example. The only problem was he chose the Apple's latest tablet computer that hit stores on Friday, which may be more popular at the New York Fed's headquarters near Wall Street than it is on the gritty streets of Queens.
>
> "Today you can buy an iPad 2 that costs the same as an iPad 1 that is twice as powerful," he said." You have to look at the prices of all things."
>
> This prompted guffaws and widespread murmuring from the audience, with one audience member calling the comment "tone deaf."
>
> "I can't eat an iPad," another said.[^252]

To sum this up, central bankers generally have a positive inflation target --- which isn't necessary and is hard to even define. The default inflation rate in a functioning society is negative, because better technology makes us more efficient at making most things over time. If policymakers reach a goal of 2% average inflation per year, it probably means money supply and truly scarce things went up by 5-7% per year, semi-scarce things went up by 3-5% per year and were offset by some declining prices of non-scarce things due to productivity gains and globalized labor arbitrage. It's important to monitor the broad money supply because that's usually a better representation of the price increases for things that require significant resources to produce and that are sought after.

If the assets that you are saving in are not going up in price at the growth rate of broad money supply per capita over a long stretch of time, then your purchasing power is being diluted. This is hard to keep track of even for a quantitative person who actively grinds the numbers, let alone a typical person who is just trying to earn income and save money. Since the growth rate of the money supply greatly exceeds interest rates most of the time, it's easy for savers to be diluted. Persistent inflation of the money supply allows policymakers and various middlemen to siphon off the purchasing power of peoples' savings without them being able to easily keep track of it. And as bad as it is for savers in developed countries, it's far worse for savers in developing countries.


## Footnotes

[^220]: Stephanie Kelton, *The The Deficit Myth: Modern Monetary Theory and the Birth of the People's Economy*.

[^221]: Schneider, "Powell's Econ 101."

[^222]: Jerome Powell, "We're Not Even Thinking About Thinking About Raising Rates," Press conference June 10, 2020.

[^223]: See for instance Friedrich Hayek, "The Use of Knowledge in Society."

[^224]: Donald Boudreaux, "'Price Gouging' After a Disaster Is Good for the Public," *Wall Street Journal*, October 3, 2017.

[^225]: Don Lavoie, *Rivalry and Central Planning*.

[^226]: Allen Farrington and Sasha Meyers, *Bitcoin is Venice: Essays on the Past and Future of Capitalism*, 63.

[^227]: Sumner, *Money Illusion*, 147, 156--158, 341.

[^228]: Associated Press in Cairo, "Egypt Devalues Currency by 48% to Meet IMF Demands for \$12bn Loan," *Guardian*, November 3, 2016.

[^229]: Al Jazeera, "Egyptian Pound Has Lost Half of its Value Since March," *Al Jazeera* *News*, January 11, 2023:

[^230]: Gregory Mankiw, "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles."

[^231]: Reuters, "Fed's Bullard Favors Bond Buys If Inflation Continues Decline," *CNBC,* April 17, 2013.

[^232]: Steve Matthews, "Bullard Says Important for Fed to Defend 2% Inflation Target," *Bloomberg*, August 14, 2013.

[^233]: Jeff Cox, "Yellen's Only Regret as Fed Chair: Low Inflation," *CNBC*, December 13, 2017.

[^234]: Anna Yukhananov, "IMF Warns on Low Inflation, Calls on ECB to Act," *Reuters*, April 2, 2014.

[^235]: Christine Lagarde, "Opening Statement by Christine Lagarde to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee of the European Parliament."

[^236]: Leika Kihara, "BOJ's Kuroda Rules Out Early End of Negative Rate Policy," *Reuters*, November 20, 2018.

[^237]: Jeff Booth, *The Price of Tomorrow*, 7--20.

[^238]: See literature reviews in Mark Thornton, "Apoplithorismosphobia," 9--12; and Philipp Bagus, *In Defense of Deflation*, 18--34.

[^239]: Andrew Atkeson and Patrick Kehoe, "Deflation and Depression: Is There an Empirical Link?"

[^240]: Stephen Reed and Darren Rippy, "Consumer Price Index Data Quality: How Accurate is the U.S. CPI?"; Martin Hochstein, "The Fairy Tale of Low Inflation in the Euro Area," 2.

[^241]: Michael Saylor, "Bitcoin, Inflation, and the Future of Money," *Lex Fridman Podcast*, April 14, 2022.

[^242]: U.S. Energy Information Administration, "U.S. Crude Oil First Purchase Price."

[^243]: BLS, "CPI for all Urban Consumers: Beef and Veal."

[^244]: Samuel H. Williamson "The Annual Consumer Price Index for the United States, 1774-Present," *MeasuringWorth*; Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, "Consumer Price Index, 1913-."

[^245]: Federal Reserve Economic Data, "Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers"; "M3 for the United States."

[^246]: World Gold Council, "Gold Spot Prices."

[^247]: BLS, "CPI for all Urban Consumers: Hospital and Related Services."

[^248]: BLS, "CPI for all Urban Consumers: Tuition, Other School Fees, and Childcare."

[^249]: BLS, "Average Hourly Earnings of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees."

[^250]: Jenn Underwood and Elizabeth Aldrich, "History of Savings Account Interest Rates," *Forbes*, January 1, 2023.

[^251]: Mark Perry, "Chart of the Day... or Century?"

[^252]: Kristina Cooke, "iPad Price Remark Gets Fed's Dudley an Earful," *Reuters*, March 11, 2011.

