# Chapter 18: **Beneficiaries of the Cantillon Effect**

Whether arguing for or against them, many people focus on top-down wealth distribution mechanisms (such as progressive income taxes) because those are the most transparent. On the other hand, monetary dilution and access to very different interest rates can often be a less transparent, bottom-up wealth distribution mechanism, and in my view, it doesn't get enough coverage.

Someone who is financially struggling tends to have poor access to credit. It will be hard for them to get a low-rate mortgage, a business loan, or a personal loan. Instead, if they need credit, they'll often turn to credit cards and payday loans, which come with very high interest rates. Meanwhile, a wealthy investor often has access to very inexpensive forms of credit, especially because they also tend to have a lot of assets that they can use for collateral. This differentiation applies on the business scale as well. A small family-run hardware store will typically have a much higher cost of credit than a nationwide hardware retail chain that systematically grows across the country and displaces those various family-run hardware stores. Meanwhile, an entity with a lot of assets can use those assets as collateral for relatively low-rate debt, and they are big enough to have access to public capital markets (i.e., they can issue bonds to a very broad set of market participants rather than rely only on local banks).

To some extent this is to be expected; different interest rates should of course reflect the risk of lending money to different entities. However, in a financial system that is built entirely around very high levels of credit and a consistently devaluing unit of account, the difference between having access to cheap credit and not having access to cheap credit becomes far more important. The ability to effectively short fiat currency with long-term debt at low interest rates has historically been a *key mechanism* of wealth creation in this inflationary system, and the inability to do so represents being shut out of that key mechanism of wealth creation.

In contrast, in a more equity-focused system centered around hard money, there would be less of a built-in advantage for large and well-connected entities that have access to cheap credit. Access to credit is still useful in the right contexts in a hard money environment, but it's a smaller part of the typical capital structure, and the systematic practice of borrowing money for decades for the primary purpose of shorting fiat currency would not be a part of it, and thus the performance gap between large and well-connected entities and smaller entities would not be as wide.

The primacy of credit access and the associated widening performance divide between large and small entities that occurs in a debt-based, weak money system is an interesting dilemma in its own right. Where it really goes off the rails is when governments perform selective bailouts during crises with printed money, at a time when governments are themselves heavily financially influenced by the largest corporate donors.

During the 2008 subprime mortgage crisis, the U.S. federal government authorized hundreds of billions of dollars of low interest loans to large banks amid the crisis to keep them liquid and solvent. Asset prices had crashed and hardly anybody had access to cheap credit at that time, but these banks were given artificially cheap credit by the government and could use it to swoop in and buy up assets and distressed competitors (who weren't given such credit) at fire sale prices. In total, banks and their executives received a lot of support from the government while the middle-class homeowners received little or none. Being given massive amounts of below-market-rate credit by the U.S. federal government with printed money at a time of distressed asset prices and distressed competitors is an absolute goldmine of value. The U.S. Treasury secretary at the time of this disbursement was himself the former CEO of Goldman Sachs, and Goldman Sachs was one of the recipients of this selective credit. Employees of bailed-out Wall Street firms went right back to receiving huge bonuses, and executives of would-be bankrupt banks who made all sorts of bad loans in the years prior walked away with eight-figure retirement packages.[^262] Meanwhile, many homeowners on the other side of that ended up losing their homes, as they were given minimal fiscal support or credit support. Plenty of people made mistakes, but the rich and well-connected people were far more likely to be bailed out than the average person.

During the March 2020 COVID-19 lockdown crisis, financial markets completely seized up. Even the U.S. Treasury market went almost completely illiquid, and so the Federal Reserve printed over \$1 trillion in new bank reserves within a three-week period to buy U.S. Treasuries and re-liquefy the market, and then kept buying more from there.[^263] This allowed the U.S. federal government to keep financing itself despite seized-up and illiquid Treasury markets. Businesses everywhere suddenly faced the risk that people would choose to remain at home as much as possible for the next several months for safety, and therefore spend less at many types of businesses temporarily. Some areas also had forced lockdowns. Normally, the Federal Reserve is not authorized to print money to buy corporate bonds, but the U.S. federal government gave them authorization to do so during this crisis with a special purpose vehicle and specific financing. When the U.S. corporate bond market froze, the Federal Reserve therefore stepped in to buy them with printed money and re-liquify that market too, allowing large publicly traded corporations to continue issuing new debt and refinancing existing debt at low interest rates without a problem.[^264] It only took a small sum of money by the Federal Reserve to send the signal to the market that the corporate bond market would be protected at all costs, and so private sector market makers stepped back in and kept the corporate bond market functioning.

However, there was no such immediate response to help small local businesses, nor were there the financial logistics in place to even do so. The Federal Reserve could buy corporate bond ETFs in giant baskets and help re-liquefy corporate bond markets quickly and easily, but the complexities of providing credit assistance to millions of small family-run restaurants and other businesses took a lot more time. Therefore, many of them went out of business early in the pandemic, while their large publicly traded corporate competitors were more easily bailed out by these centralized liquidity programs.

And then, to try to address that imbalance, Congress introduced the Paycheck Protection Program as part of the CARES Act. The Paycheck Protection Program provided hundreds of billions of dollars of loans to support small businesses (up to 500 employees), and those loans were later forgiven, which turned them into outright grants, paid for with printed money. At first glance, this made sense: Small restaurants and businesses like that could receive a few months of support during a temporary pandemic crisis, and indeed, many businesses were saved by it. Deploying resources into hard-hit areas during a time of crisis makes sense. However, it took longer to get this money to the small businesses than it took to get financing for corporations, and this program did not effectively filter out the types of businesses that didn't need the aid. An owner of a high-margin law firm or a high-margin investment research firm, for example, could receive a \$500,000 or \$1,000,000 grant even if their business wasn't really in trouble and they were able to pay employees as normal. In that case, this money dropped right to the bottom line of the already wealthy owners.[^265]

A 2022 study by the American Economic Association called, "The \$800 Billion Paycheck Protection Program: Where Did the Money Go and Why Did It Go There?" found that three-quarters of the funds went to the top 20% wealthiest households, and very little went to actually keeping workers in their jobs:

> The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) provided small businesses with roughly \$800 billion dollars in uncollateralized, low-interest loans during the pandemic, almost all of which will be forgiven. With 94 percent of small businesses ultimately receiving one or more loans, the PPP nearly saturated its market in just two months. We estimate that the program cumulatively preserved between 2 and 3 million job-years of employment over 14 months at a cost of \$169K to \$258K per job-year retained. These numbers imply that only 23 to 34 percent of PPP dollars went directly to workers who would otherwise have lost jobs; the balance flowed to business owners and shareholders, including creditors and suppliers of PPP-receiving firms. Program incidence was ultimately highly regressive, with about three-quarters of PPP funds accruing to the top quintile of households. PPP\'s breakneck scale-up, its high cost per job saved, and its regressive incidence have a common origin: PPP was essentially untargeted because the United States lacked the administrative infrastructure to do otherwise. Harnessing modern administrative systems, other high-income countries were able to better target pandemic business aid to firms in financial distress. Building similar capacity in the U.S. would enable improved targeting when the next pandemic or other large-scale economic emergency inevitably arises.[^266]

During the 2020 and 2021 crisis stimulus response overall, the typical person received several thousand dollars in stimulus checks and extra childcare tax credits, but there were wealthy lawyers, investment managers, and business owners that received hundreds of thousands of dollars per person in unneeded fiscal aid, and certain corporations that received billions of dollars and laid off employees anyway. All of this was with printed money, which devalued the savings of anyone holding cash or bonds. As the dust settled over the following years, the combination of fiscal stimulus and the recovery of asset prices led to very uneven results. The bottom 50% of the population collectively saw their net worth increase by \$1.5 trillion from the beginning of 2020 to the beginning of 2022. The top 1% of the population collectively saw their net worth increase by \$11.8 trillion over the same period[^267]. There were trillions of new dollars in the system, and prices went up as a result. Some people in the upper-middle class, like working physicians, received little or no aid and had to deal with prices going up from all of this monetary dilution, and so they were basically left out between wealthy business owners that received aid and lower-income people that received aid. Similarly, some businesses didn't apply for the Paycheck Protection Program, and thus were at a competitive disadvantage to businesses that applied for it and received it despite not really needing it.

During the economic expansion of the 2010s decade, many airline companies (large, publicly traded corporations) decided not to build any significant cash reserves and instead to spend most of their profits on dividends and share buybacks for investors. When the 2020 COVID-19 crisis hit and air travel volumes collapsed, many airlines faced the prospect of bankruptcy. If airlines were to go bankrupt, it's not as though they would cease to exist. Instead, their debtholders would face a partial loss and become the new equity holders in the bankruptcy proceedings, and the former equity holders would be wiped out. If this were to occur, airlines with more conservative financial situations (who had purposely grown more slowly with less debt, paid fewer dividends and buybacks to shareholders, and maintained larger cash reserves) would have had a better prospect of surviving through the crisis than their more aggressively leveraged competitors.[^268] Prudence would have been rewarded.

Instead, the U.S. federal government spent tens of billions of dollars bailing out the airline industry, and beyond that also offered subsidized loans (access to credit at below-market rates) to them. This rewarded airlines that aggressively expanded with cheap debt throughout the 2010s decade, that didn't save any profits, and who had instead borrowed money, maintained a weak balance sheet, and sent as much cash as possible to shareholders when times were good. Anyone prudent enough to run an airline corporation more conservatively at the cost of slower growth and/or less dividends for shareholders so that they could weather potential recessions more safely, was punished in hindsight for all of those years of prudence.

This uneven and scattershot fiscal aid to people and businesses didn't come from any stockpile or reserve. The U.S. federal government did not save money during good times to have a reserve from which to bail out failing firms during bad times. Instead, the U.S. federal government issued trillions of dollars in new bonds, which were promptly purchased by the Federal Reserve with brand new bank reserves that were printed out of thin air. Therefore, both the amount of base money and broad money grew rapidly during 2020 and 2021. Over a 2-year period from the start of 2020 to the start of 2022, the broad money supply increased by approximately 40%.[^269] Printing money in this way devalued savers, bondholders, and in general people who didn't receive much aid, and rewarded debtors and those who received large amounts of aid (keeping in mind that the biggest recipients of aid were corporations and business owners). Large institutions with low fixed-rate debt or other cheap sources of credit were able to basically short fiat currency throughout this process by maintaining debt with interest rates that were below the inflation rate and way below the rate of new money creation, and the government and central bank directly stepped into the corporate bond market with injections of new liquidity to make sure they could keep doing that.

If the monetary environment had been such that it encouraged savings and more careful use of credit in the first place, then the economy would be better positioned to handle an external shock such as a pandemic. But because it instead encourages and rewards large usage of credit, the system is highly leveraged and incredibly vulnerable to any sort of external shock that could disrupt cash flows. And then the selectivity and the logistics limitations of providing bailouts during a crisis naturally favors those that are larger and closer to the source of money creation.

The Cantillon effect, identified in the 18th century by Richard Cantillon, describes the uneven effects of new money supply on price inflation. Suppose, for example, that someone discovers a huge new gold mine in an economy where gold is widely used as money. As they mine and sell that new gold supply onto the market, the original seller will get a pretty good exchange rate for it and will be able to buy all manner of goods and services with it at current prices. Secondary recipients of the new gold (the merchants who sold goods and services directly to the original gold miner) may also get a pretty good price for the products and services they buy with it. However, over the next few years as the gold money supply noticeably increases throughout the economy, and people have more gold to spend in general, it'll likely result in price inflation, since more money is in circulation chasing a similar amount of goods and services. The closer and earlier someone was to the original injection of new gold into the economy, the better off they were. It was best to be the original gold miner, and second best to be among the earliest merchants to receive that new gold. The worst place to be in this situation was to be a common worker who, after prices have *already* gone up by quite a bit due to so much new gold circulating around the economy, is barely able to convince her boss to get a small wage increase just to partially keep up.[^270]

In a fiat currency system, this Cantillon effect is heightened. Selective bailouts and government-subsidized credit given out with newly created money at a time of acute liquidity crises benefit entities that are large and well-connected. In general, big entities (especially large banks and corporations) benefit from this system over small entities because they can reliably get access to cheap debt, which represents a short on the diluting currency and a method to buy more scarce assets with it. These entities, being close to the sources of money creation, have the benefit of access to capital markets and easy loans (during the good times) and bailouts (during the bad times). It's a system with inherently centralizing aspects that tends to help existing winners continue to win more. And then winners can go on to become the biggest political donors and maintain their all-important access to the money printer when needed.

From the perspective of large financial entities, in addition to outcompeting smaller competitors directly, it makes a lot of sense to buy smaller competitors, refinance them, and/or leverage them up with cheap debt. For decades, large corporations and private equity firms did exactly this, making use of the fact that they had access to cheaper credit than smaller entities to buy those smaller entities up and consolidate them, and it has been incredibly lucrative. When money is persistently weak, the smart strategy is to grow big and to get better and better access to cheap financing.

Over the past several decades, especially in the United States, small stores have gradually been displaced by large national chains, and small banks have gradually been acquired into larger banks. In 1972, according to FDIC, there were 13,733 banks in the country with 24,829 branches. Fifty years later in 2022, there were only 4,135 banks with 71,190 branches.[^271] Although the population increased and the number of branches increased (not to mention all the online banking that the industry shifted toward), the number of separate banks dropped dramatically and consolidated into fewer, larger ones. And even those statistics understate the level of concentration; in 2022 the top ten banks alone had 55% of all bank assets, with the other 4,000+ combined banks holding the remaining 45%.[^272] Due to a rapid tightening of monetary policy in 2022, cash was sucked out of community and regional banks more quickly than large nationwide banks, and by 2023 this contributed to a series of bank runs.[^273] The number of banks is likely going to keep consolidating toward smaller numbers.

Overall, an environment of persistent currency debasement and selective access to cheap credit naturally favors larger entities over smaller entities and tends to centralize wealth and influence over time toward those that control those larger entities. Within this system, the biggest debtor that always gets access to cheap credit and plenty of liquidity is the U.S. federal government, whose debt will readily be purchased by the Federal Reserve with new base money whenever needed. Below that, the major U.S. banks and corporations have been constantly enabled --- by both Federal Reserve activity and fiscal stimulus by Congress --- to get access to cheap and liquid debt markets even during crises when liquidity naturally dries up for less well-connected entities. In the middle of the list in terms of credit access are small businesses and normal homeowners who have more selective access to cheap credit only when times are good, and at the bottom of the list are those in the working class or in poverty who rarely have access to cheap credit.


## Footnotes

[^262]: Louise Story and Eric Dash, "Bankers Reaped Lavish Bonuses During Bailouts," *New York Times*, July 30, 2009.

[^263]: Federal Reserve Economic Data, "Reserves of Depository Institutions: Total."

[^264]: Eric Milstein and David Wessel, "What Did the Fed Do in Response to the COVID-19 Crisis?" *Brookings Institution*, December 17, 2021.

[^265]: Ken Dilanian and Laura Strickler, "'Biggest Fraud in a Generation': The Looting of the Covid Relief Plan Known as PPP," *NBC News*, March 28, 2022.

[^266]: David Autor et al., "The \$800 Billion Paycheck Protection Program."

[^267]: Federal Reserve Economic Data, "Total Net Worth Held by the Bottom 50%"; "Total Net Worth Held by the Top 1%"

[^268]: Veronique de Rugy and Gary Leff, "Bailouts Left Airlines, the Economy, and the Federal Budget in Worse Shape Than Before."

[^269]: Federal Reserve Economic Data, "M3 for the United States."

[^270]: Richard Cantillon, *Essay on the Nature of Trade in General,* 74--75.

[^271]: FDIC, "BankFind Suite."

[^272]: Federal Reserve Statistical Release, "Large Commercial Banks."

[^273]: Lyn Alden, "March 2023 Newsletter: A Look at Bank Solvency."

