# Chapter 24: **Proof-of-Work vs Proof-of-Stake**

An earlier chapter in this part of the book discussed various blockchain design trade-offs as it relates to speed, throughput, privacy, expressivity, and energy. Out of those, the usage of energy for ordering blockchain transactions and maintaining an unforgeable history is worth dedicating a couple chapters to, since it is poorly understood and yet critically important.[^351]

As an alternative to the Bitcoin network's energy use, there have been several consensus models proposed and implemented, with proof-of-stake systems being the most common alternative. Proof-of-stake systems use existing coin holders as validators to add new blocks of transactions to the blockchain. There are some interesting aspects to these systems, but they make several huge trade-offs relative to proof-of-work systems.

In short, the input of energy into a blockchain is what allows the network to reduce governance as an input as much as possible. If blockchain designers eliminate energy as an input, they bring back a significant degree of governance into the network, which at least partially defeats the purpose of using a blockchain in the first place. Energy can be relied upon as a neutral arbiter of truth, and this chapter will go into detail as to why that is the case.

**Proof-of-Work Review**

As described in an earlier chapter, the Bitcoin network is programmed to create a new block on average every ten minutes and add that block to the blockchain, which consists of hundreds of thousands of blocks since inception in 2009.

A new block is produced by a bitcoin miner (a specialized computer) contributing processing power (and thus electricity) to solve a cryptographic puzzle that the previous block created. The entity that solves the puzzle can create a new block, package thousands of Bitcoin transactions currently in the queue into that new block, and attach it to the blockchain for the next block to be built on. That's how transactions get ordered, and how the ledger gets updated. The network is programmed to target average block times of ten minutes, meaning on average every ten minutes a block of thousands of transactions is added to the blockchain.

Processors use random guesses to solve the puzzle left by the prior block, and the law of large numbers makes it so that the more specialized processing power you have, the more blocks you will find.

If miners drop off the network and new blocks on average start taking longer than ten minutes to produce, the network is automatically programmed to make the puzzle easier by a quantified amount, so that blocks go back to an every-ten-minute average schedule. In contrast, if a lot of miners join the network and blocks get added to the blockchain faster than every ten minutes on average, the network will make the puzzle harder. This is known as the "difficulty adjustment." It occurs automatically every two weeks and is one of the key programming challenges that Satoshi Nakamoto solved to make the network work properly.[^352]

As a result of this design, at any given time there are millions of bitcoin mining machines around the world looking to solve the puzzle and create the next block, and there's a natural feedback mechanism to ensure that blocks are created on average every ten minutes regardless of how much computational power joins or leaves the network.

In the first half of 2021, China (which at the time was by far the largest country in terms of miner concentration) banned cryptocurrency mining and approximately half the global bitcoin mining network went offline and started moving elsewhere. Bitcoin's payment network briefly slowed down, but otherwise kept working with 100% uptime. The difficulty adjustment then kicked in and brought the network back up to its target speed. Imagine if large cloud infrastructure providers like Amazon or Microsoft were told with one week's notice that they had to move half of their server capacity internationally; they would likely experience uptime issues for their services for the rest of the year or longer as they moved and rebuilt half of their infrastructure. The Bitcoin network instead continued to operate with 100% uptime. And ironically, a considerable amount of mining came back online in China after the ban; even their authoritarian government has been unable to completely stamp it out.[^353] As of this writing, most estimates point to China being the second-largest mining jurisdiction after the United States.

If a miner creates an invalid block, meaning one that doesn't conform to the shared rules of the existing node network, the network discards it. If two miners produce a valid block at around the same time, the winner will be decided by which has the next valid block produced and added onto it, thus becoming the longer (and official) blockchain. If those second blocks are also close, then it will come down to who wins the third valid block, or fourth valid block. Eventually a heavier chain wins, as a greater share of the network is finding it and building on top of it.

This process is known as "proof-of-work." Millions of machines are using electricity and specialized processors to apply processing power to guess the answer to cryptographic puzzles left by the most recent block. This may seem like a waste of energy, but it's what keeps the system decentralized and reduces the need for human governance. Energy is the arbiter of truth, in this case. There is no central authority or oligopolistic set of validators that decides what constitutes a valid block or a valid set of transactions or which transaction occurred before another transaction; the blockchain with the most work in it is mathematically verifiable at any given time and is recognized as truth by the rest of the node network --- all based on code. The blockchain with the most work put into it, and that also meets the consensus criteria that the Bitcoin node network checks, continually becomes recognized as the global consensus ledger.

The more energy that is actively being consumed by the Bitcoin network, the more costly it is for any entity to gain and maintain over 50% of the processing power of the network, which would allow them to censor transactions and/or perform various double-spend attacks. Many of the tiny non-Bitcoin blockchains have been victims of 51% attacks of this sort, while Bitcoin has a much larger and more diversified mining ecosystem, which so far has made it quite resistant to attacks.

Satoshi Nakamoto used a proof-of-work transaction ordering mechanism in his design due to its trustless nature, and he described it as follows:

> Proof-of-work has the nice property that it can be relayed through untrusted middlemen. We don't have to worry about a chain of custody of communication. It doesn't matter who tells you a longest chain, the proof-of-work speaks for itself.[^354]

The primary advantage of a proof-of-work system is that the history of the ledger is unforgeable unless someone is willing and able to commit more processing power than the total of the entire history of the Bitcoin network to undo it. Again, Satoshi himself provided useful insight on this:

> The network timestamps transactions by hashing them into an ongoing chain of hash-based proof-of-work, forming a record that cannot be changed without redoing the proof-of-work. The longest chain not only serves as proof of the sequence of events witnessed, but proof that it came from the largest pool of CPU power.[^355]

Hugo Nguyen, in his 2018 essay "Work is Timeless, Stake is Not" describes this effect as follows:

> Energy expended per block not only secures the UTXOs \[transactions\] belonging in that block but also retroactively secures all global UTXOs that occurred in past blocks. The reason for this is because it would be impossible to revert past UTXOs without reverting the current block first. Each new block effectively "buries" all existing UTXOs under its weight.[^356]

We can imagine Bitcoin's blockchain ledger as a giant decentralized digital monument dedicated to preserving the objectivity of the past, built out of processing power, and growing larger each day. To re-arrange the past according to Bitcoin's consensus mechanism, an entity would need to wield an unfathomable amount of energy and processing power in the present.

**Proof-of-Stake Has No Unforgeable History**

Proof-of-stake is a system whereby holders of the cryptocurrency temporarily lock up or "stake" their coins, use them to vote on new block creation, and get rewarded with more coins for successfully creating new blocks. Instead of committing electricity and processing power to create new blocks on the blockchain, they're proving that they have a significant stake of coins in the network and are using this as their transaction signing authority.

The primary advantage of a proof-of-stake consensus model is that it allows a small blockchain to increase the cost of brute-force attacking it compared to if it was utilizing a proof-of-work mechanism. Many small proof-of-work blockchains have a low cost to perform 51% attacks on, which allows the attacker to censor the network or reverse recent transactions. A small proof-of-stake blockchain, on the other hand, is difficult to attack externally with brute-force because the external attacker must buy a large percentage of the coins, which drives up the price and therefore makes it increasingly difficult for the attacker to gain enough coins to perform the attack.

A secondary advantage of a proof-of-stake consensus model is that by reducing the external cost of transaction ordering, they can redirect that saved expense toward burning coins. In other words, they can create outright deflationary monetary policies for their coins. The system can be designed so that it continually issues a significant number of new coins as a reward for validators, while burning (destroying) coins with extra transaction fees as well, thereby avoiding an inflationary monetary policy and potentially achieving a deflationary monetary policy, as long as the network remains in high demand with users willing to pay significant transaction fees.

However, a proof-of-stake system has numerous downsides, with far more attack surfaces compared to a proof-of-work system. By detaching themselves almost entirely from the physical realm, proof-of-stake blockchains turn themselves into perpetual motion machines based on circular logic, with low fault tolerance. When I first explored proof-of-stake as a concept it seemed very interesting, but the more I dug into it, the more I realized how important proof-of-work is in contexts where immutability really matters.

The primary (and insurmountable) shortcoming of a proof-of-stake system is that the history of its ledger has no unforgeable costliness. The ledger just consists of a series of signed transactions by validators (coin holders). Anyone can therefore create a nearly infinite number of alternative histories of transactions, i.e., alternative ledgers, and there is no way for someone to look at them and independently determine which one is the "real" history. There is no way to prove who the validators historically were, and what transactions they historically signed.

The closest way to know what the real history was in a proof-of-stake system is for a node to never, ever, go offline. If they ran their node from the inception of the network until the present time, never once going offline, and watching each block be produced from genesis, then they may be able to declare that they know the full and real history of the ledger. But how do they prove this to others? Do they become the central authority, and thus defeat the purpose of a decentralized blockchain?

The ability for a node to leave and rejoin the network without relying on trust was important enough to Satoshi that he mentioned it in the abstract at the top of his original 2008 Bitcoin whitepaper:

> A purely peer-to-peer version of electronic cash would allow online payments to be sent directly from one party to another without going through a financial institution. Digital signatures provide part of the solution, but the main benefits are lost if a trusted third party is still required to prevent double-spending. We propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer network. The network timestamps transactions by hashing them into an ongoing chain of hash-based proof-of-work, forming a record that cannot be changed without redoing the proof-of-work. The longest chain not only serves as proof of the sequence of events witnessed, but proof that it came from the largest pool of CPU power. As long as a majority of CPU power is controlled by nodes that are not cooperating to attack the network, they\'ll generate the longest chain and outpace attackers. The network itself requires minimal structure. Messages are broadcast on a best effort basis, and nodes can leave and rejoin the network at will, accepting the longest proof-of-work chain as proof of what happened while they were gone.[^357]

Proof-of-stake systems give up this ability to leave and rejoin the network without relying on trust. If a node leaves and later rejoins the network, they have no way to prove what the true history of the ledger is, and what occurred while they were offline. If there are competing versions of what the history of the ledger is, they have no ability to determine which one is valid. They would have to look toward some authority, some node that can claim that it has always been online, and trust it.

Worse yet, even a node that has somehow been online continuously since genesis of the proof-of-stake blockchain has the possibility of getting siloed away from most of the network as part of a clever attack. Hugo Nguyen, in his 2018 essay "Proof-of-Stake, Private Key Attacks and Unforgeable Costliness the Unsung Hero," describes this effect as follows:

> Second & much more importantly, once the PoW node software has been downloaded, it's reasonably safe for the PoW node operator to turn off the node for an arbitrary amount of time. Past the bootstrapping stage, PoW is highly permission-less: nodes can come & go whenever they like. The only exception to this is in the event of hard forks, which require the node operators to repeat the bootstrapping process (another reason hard forks should be used very judiciously & avoided if possible).
>
> In contrast, a PoS node operator, even with the correct software downloaded, will regularly need to reach out to trusted third parties to ensure he stays on the canonical chain. The fear of losing contact with the main network & getting tricked onto the wrong chain will continue for eternity, possibly long after the trusted third parties cease to exist! This marks a significant degradation in security.[^358]

In other words, with proof-of-stake systems we do have to worry about the chain of custody of communication, since unlike proof-of-work, proof-of-stake does not speak for itself. Gigi, the pseudonymous author of the book *21 Lessons,* also summarized the difference well:

> Proof of work is not only useful but absolutely essential. Trustless digital money can't work without it. You always need an anchor to the physical realm. Without this anchor, a truthful history that is self-evident is impossible. Energy is the only anchor we have.
>
> Proof of work = trust physics to determine what happened.
>
> Proof of stake = trust humans to determine what happened.[^359]

This problem of trust in a proof-of-stake blockchain applies to individual node operators, and from there it also applies to the entire blockchain. If there is a bug in the network and it stops operating for a time, then that creates an obvious problem --- not a single node can say it never went offline.

In 2022, the Solana proof-of-stake blockchain unexpectedly went offline on five separate occasions, and it did so again in 2023. Due to a code exploit in 2022, the Binance Smart Chain (also a proof-of-stake system) deliberately went offline once. These were both in the top ten cryptocurrencies by market capitalization when they went offline. When the validators of such a network eventually fix the problem and restart the blockchain, how do they know where to start it from, since there is no self-verifiable, unforgeable history of the ledger? Anyone can make an unlimited number of alternative histories for virtually zero cost, with no way to prove which one was historically correct.

The answer is that they govern it like an oligopoly; the major validator operators literally get into a (chat) room and manually figure out where to restart the blockchain from, based on their own records. Since the requirements to run a validator for these blockchains are rather high and the coins are rather concentrated, there are a rather small number of large validating entities that really matter. This manual governing process is the alternative if one wishes to avoid using energy directly.

As an attempt to solve this dilemma, a proof-of-stake blockchain could create regular checkpoints, so that if the system goes offline, they can restart from the latest checkpoint. But that creates a new question: Who determines what checkpoints to use and where to store them? Why should others trust those checkpoints? So far, the best (and most ironic) solution to this dilemma has been for proof-of-stake systems to regularly insert their checkpoints into the Bitcoin blockchain, and thus rely on the unforgeable history of decentralized proof-of-work.

An analogy I like to use for the proof-of-stake vs proof-of-work comparison is that they are respectively like volatile and non-volatile computer memory.[^360] When you use a computer, you are interacting with two main types of memory that each serve a different purpose.

Volatile memory is very fast, but when it powers down and powers back up, it loses all its stored data. It's only meant for short-term memory usage while you're performing a function. Random access memory, or RAM, is a type of volatile memory that many people are familiar with for this type of memory. Conceptually, a proof-of-stake blockchain is kind of like this. If a node leaves the network and returns, it has no way to determine for itself where to restart from, other than relying on a trusted third party. If the whole network goes offline and then comes back online, participants have no way to determine what the real history of the ledger was and where to restart from, other than by oligopolistic validator operators getting together to agree and manually restart it.

Non-volatile memory is not quite as fast, but when it powers down and powers back up, it retains the memory it had before it powered down. Due to this robust aspect, it can be used for long-term data storage. Hard drives or solid-state drives are examples that many people are familiar with for this type of memory. Conceptually, a proof-of-work blockchain is kind of like this. If a node leaves the network and returns, it can easily look around for propagating blockchains, identify the one with the most processing power inserted into it, directly verify it, and use that one. If the whole network goes offline and then comes back online, the nodes implicitly understand how to identify and continue building on the biggest blockchain, which still exists and is the one with the most verifiable amount of processing power embedded into it that follows the network's ruleset.

A way to summarize this section is to simply say that proof-of-stake systems rely on circular logic to gain their various benefits. In a proof-of-work system, the history of the ledger is accepted as the one that meets the rules of the node network and has the most work embedded into it. In a proof-of-stake system, the coin holders determine the history of the ledger, and who the existing coin holders are is determined by the history of the ledger. That usage of circular logic is why a proof-of-stake system has poor fault tolerance, no unforgeable history, and no inherent ability to recover from the network going offline other than from oligopolistic decision-making (human governance) or regularly checkpointing into a proof-of-work system.

**Proof-of-Stake is Far More Complex**

Proof-of-work is simple because it speaks for itself; there is no need to punish bad miners that try to validate the wrong chain or make invalid blocks that don't fit the rules of the node network. Their punishment is simply that they spent electricity on blocks that weren't valid or weren't included in the longest eventual chain, and thus lost money. They self-inflict their own wound, and thus it rarely happens on purpose. There is a tangible connection between the blockchain and real-world resources.

Proof-of-stake is more complex because it doesn't speak for itself; there is no connection to real-world resources and the system needs a way to punish stakers that improperly vote on the "wrong" chain. In addition, they need a way to make sure stakers aren't voting on all possible chains (which can't be done with proof-of-work, because it takes real-world resources for each "vote"). So, proof-of-stake consensus methods are more complex systems that will try to remove stakers' coins if they vote improperly, with ways of checking to see if validators are voting on multiple chains. This is known as "slashing."

Proof-of-stake networks require at least an order of magnitude more lines of code to function, because rather than letting energy serve as the arbiter of truth, they are instead relying on a complex series of circular events to try to organize the ledger and solve disputes. By eliminating the input of energy to solve fundamental problems and inject true entropy into the system, they create different problems. By trying to solve those problems, they create still more problems, and around and around it goes.

At the end of the day, it boils down to governance in a proof-of-stake network. Developers and coin holders end up serving as the executives and shareholders respectively in an equity-like structure.

The combination of proof-of-work and difficulty adjustments was a true innovation that allowed for the decentralized and unforgeable ordering of transactions. In other words, Satoshi Nakamoto created a true timechain with an unforgeable history, rather than merely a blockchain. Proof-of-stake consensus mechanisms instead recreate corporate equity structures in a digital realm, including their need for partially centralized governance due to lack of true fault tolerance. Proof-of-stake as a consensus mechanism allows for the operation of a blockchain, but not a true timechain.

**Proof-of-Stake is Inherently Centralizing**

Investors who are familiar with real-world natural resource mining companies know how poor their returns tend to be over the long run. They may perform very well in inflationary decades, but for the long periods in between, mining companies in aggregate tend to destroy capital and financially underperform the very commodity that they spend their resources mining. Only the very best outperform.

This is because commodity miners have little or no control over their expenses (like diesel fuel and labor) or the price of their own product (the commodity they are mining). Let's take a copper miner as an example. They can't really choose their jurisdiction; they must go to where the copper deposits are. From there, they must pay for labor, equipment, and a lot of diesel fuel, and they have limited control over the price of any of these inputs. Similarly, they have no control over the price of copper itself, which fluctuates wildly based on global supply and demand.

Commodity miners can decide when to take risks and invest more money to develop a mine, or when to reduce risk, reduce investment, strengthen their balance sheet, and so forth. That's about it, and that's what separates a good miner from a bad one. When commodity prices are high, it becomes more profitable to mine deposits, and more miners start expending resources to develop those deposits. Then, when commodity prices go down, many of those miners' mines are no longer profitable, and they go bankrupt or are otherwise financially impaired. These are the reasons that the mining industry tends to have exaggerated booms and busts.

The same is mostly true for cryptocurrency miners. They buy the latest specialized processors, they build datacenter infrastructure to host them, and they buy electricity. They can go to where the cheapest electricity is, but overall, they don't have much control over the price of these inputs. Once they are set up, they mine the cryptocurrency, and they have no control over the purchasing power of the cryptocurrency that they are mining. As a result, it's a very difficult business, and they don't tend to get very big.

Larger bitcoin miners save some money on overhead costs relative to the size of their operation, but only up to a point. In contrast, many of the cheapest forms of stranded electricity and productive usages of waste heat are only found in small amounts, which is advantageous for smaller miners. As a result of both factors, cryptocurrency miners in a proof-of-work system tend to not centralize very much. Instead, they tend to remain decentralized and ever-changing.

In contrast to all of this, proof-of-stake tends to be rather centralizing and persistent. Once a large coin holder gathers a significant number of coins, becomes a validator, and starts earning more coins, they begin an exponential journey toward increasing their share of the network. In contrast to a proof-of-work miner which has high and fluctuating real-world expenses, a proof-of-stake validator's expenses for maintaining their coins and validator are nearly zero. They can continue to collect new coins from validating and use those new coins to generate even more coins.

Just like how corporate equity ownership tends to consolidate toward the top 10% and especially toward the top 1% in society over the long run (since equity holdings continually provide returns and have no maintenance cost for the wealthy holder), coins in proof-of-stake systems tend to consolidate toward the largest holders. Over time, this means that the wealthiest members of the network gain the ability to censor the network, with no recourse for smaller users.

If a proof-of-work blockchain is struck by a 51% censorship attack by a group of miners, then this is indeed a problem, but a reversible one. Other people, such as the various censored entities on the network, can construct or acquire new processors, plug them in, increase the overall amount of processing power on the network, and reduce the attackers' total processing power to less than 51% of the network. There is no limit to how much additional processing power can come in and un-censor the network, other than real-world resources external to the network. In other words, for a proof-of-work blockchain, a 51% censorship attack is a "check" but not a "checkmate."

In contrast, if a proof-of-stake network is struck by a censorship attack by a majority of validators (which in practice currently is a small consortium of the wealthiest coin holders, including large custodians that pool together the coins of smaller coin holders and are controllable by their governments similar to how banks are), then censored entities have no recourse to get their transactions uncensored other than by forking off in their own direction. During an attack, most new coins being generated are being given to the biggest validators (the ones performing the censorship attack), and there's no other way to get new coins and dilute the control of the majority stakers. It's a "checkmate" scenario rather than merely a "check," unless the validators can be convinced or coerced to un-censor the network, or if extreme forks are done to split the network and try to recover from that weakened state.

To summarize, proof-of-stake blockchains have little or no operating expense for validators, and thus coins tend to concentrate into wealthy hands. And if that small, wealthy group ever decides to censor certain transactions for any reason then there is no process --- other than a minority fork --- to regain control from them and un-censor those transactions. Proof-of-stake validators get to decide who becomes validators, and whether more validators can join the network. Therefore, the network is permanently capturable. In contrast, proof-of-work miners cannot prevent other miners from expending processing power and electricity to create new blocks of transactions. Therefore, the network is temporarily capturable but not necessarily permanently capturable.

**Proof-of-Stake Has Limited Distribution Capability**

In addition to ordering transactions and serving as a decentralized timestamping service, a proof-of-work consensus model allows a blockchain to bootstrap anonymously and without raising capital. It's an ideal way to distribute coins as they are initially created.

When Satoshi Nakamoto created Bitcoin and put it out into the wild in January 2009, he did so anonymously and without raising capital. He merely published a white paper, various emails, and then the open-source software. It's actually quite notable that he gave away all the key insights before he published the software itself, which demonstrates that he wasn't operating under a profit motive. The original software served as a combined node-and-miner client, and all the bitcoin eventually sprung from this program and its various backward-compatible successors. As early users expended a rather minimal amount of electricity from their computers to run the software early on, they added new blocks of transactions to the blockchain and produced initial coins for themselves in the process.

All coins in the Bitcoin network are created when miners add new blocks to the blockchain. In the first 210,000 blocks (approximately four years) of the network, a miner was allowed by the node software to give themselves 50 coins per block they produced, in addition to any transaction fees that the senders provided to ensure that their transactions get into a block. The new coins that are created in each block are referred to as a "block subsidy." Every 210,000 blocks, that block subsidy number automatically gets cut in half, until eventually there will be no new coins created and miners' revenue will consist entirely of transaction fees.

In addition to incentivizing people to contribute processing power to operate the network, this block subsidy is what distributes the coins. Satoshi didn't grant himself any coins. He didn't arbitrarily hand coins out to his friends. He didn't create an investment contract, raise capital as a security, and give those capital providers initial coins. Instead, he merely put out an open software client, and every single spendable coin had to be earned by a user contributing processing power to the network, or from buying the coin from a user who did.

Proof-of-stake blockchains lack this easy bootstrapping capability. Since coin holders ("stakers") create new blocks of transactions in a proof-of-stake blockchain, an obvious problem arises: Who are the initial coin holders? No transactions can be processed without an initial set of coin holders, but where did those initial coin holders get their coins from?

A common answer is that the developer creates an investment contract: Investors pay in some way and receive the initial coins. In other words, the project begins its life as a financial security. Alternatively, the creator or creators could distribute coins to themselves and their friends or could create mechanisms to hand out free coins initially (which is very hard to do on any sort of fair basis).

Once a proof-of-stake system is in operation, it then begins a rather centralizing process as described earlier. Those who have a lot of coins can stake them, use them for new block validation, and earn more coins exponentially, with minimal need to ever spend them.

A proof-of-work blockchain tends to be inherently distributive. Coin holders don't receive any new coins simply for having coins; they can only earn new coins if they exchange something to buy them (such as dollars or other assets they own), or if they expend energy and other resources to mine them. Any expenses that the coin holders have as a person or as a business entity will generally require selling coins, unless they have some external income source that exceeds their expenses.

A proof-of-stake blockchain tends to be inherently concentrating. Coin holders receive new coins in proportion to coins they hold if they are staking them (either themselves or with a third-party staking provider to handle the details for them). This requires little or no expenditure of resources. If the yield they earn from this staking exceeds their personal or business expenses, then they can compound their coins indefinitely and exponentially. This is in addition to any external income source they might have.

**Are There Uses for Proof-of-Stake Systems?**

My analysis leads to the conclusion that proof-of-stake systems are not suitable consensus mechanisms for building robust decentralized global money. In other words, a proof-of-stake blockchain is not robust enough to create "money for enemies" on a global, decentralized scale. The lack of unforgeable costliness to prove the correct history of the ledger is too large of a problem to overcome in that regard. By stripping out the input of energy, proof-of-stake systems inherently require more governance instead, and therefore become equity-like and unfit for geopolitical challenges.

But does that mean that proof-of-stake systems have no long-term rational use-case? As of this writing, my answer is that I don't know.

A common logical fallacy is that of a "strawman," where someone wishes to counter an opponent's argument, but instead of properly doing so, they construct a much easier but false version of the opponent's argument and then counter that one. The opposite of this fallacy is to "steelman" an argument, which means to construct the strongest possible version of the argument that you can think of --- ideally one that is even more convincing than what the opponent has made --- and then either counter that one or admit it has merit. It's an important exercise for being intellectually honest.

A blockchain, especially the truly decentralized variety, is basically a database that is small and tight enough that thousands or millions of entities around the world can store it on their local devices and constantly update it peer-to-peer using an established set of rules.

A fully centralized database has fewer limitations because it doesn't need to be small and tight. A large service provider can have an utterly massive database, contained in a server farm. That can make things run very efficiently, but unlike with a blockchain, external entities can't directly audit its content and changes, and have no control over it.

Your social media account is an item in a corporation's database; it can be deleted or changed, and you have no say in this. You have no way to audit what information they hold about you in their database. The same is true for your bank accounts, your criminal records, your health records, any cloud services you use, and so forth. Corporations and government entities have databases and may at times choose to let you access those databases with limited permissions, or not. They are fully centralized, non-auditable, and easily changeable by the organization that runs it.

As this part of the book is exploring, the best application of a sufficiently decentralized database seems to be money. Money is a ledger, and the more open and immutable it is, the better it is from a user perspective. The ability to store value in a distributed ledger by simply saving or memorizing a number and transfer that value to others whenever you want, in a way that millions of other participants recognize and that no centralized entity can change or prevent or debase, is quite useful.

It's also likely useful as a time capsule of history. There are certainly uses for putting some arbitrary data into the Bitcoin blockchain if one is willing to pay the fees to do it. Documents, books, pictures, or timestamps from other software programs can be put into the blockchain, and while they might not serve as proof that they are objectively true, they can serve as proof that they have been untampered with from the point of being entered into the blockchain.

Developers of proof-of-stake smart contract platforms propose that there are many more potential applications that benefit from blockchain technology as well, besides just money and small amounts of immutable data. That remains an open question among cryptocurrency traders and investors: Which other applications? The tokenization of assets and collectibles seems to be at the forefront of these applications, along with various pseudo-decentralized ways to trade or leverage them using smart contracts.

The biggest challenge with these proposals is that the more features are incorporated into a blockchain on the base layer, the less "small and tight" it is, and therefore the less decentralized it tends to be. If a blockchain is not small and tight enough that users can run their own node and interact with the network without a trusted third party, then doesn't it defeat the purpose of what it is trying to do?

Are there shades of partial decentralization that people will accept in exchange for more features that the database can offer? And can those partially decentralized blockchains survive attacks, disagreements, and other tests over the long term? Since we know that there are use-cases for fully centralized databases (e.g., all the various social media networks, cloud providers, and other systems we interact with on a regular basis), as well as use-cases for fully decentralized databases (e.g., Bitcoin), are there use-cases for a "partially centralized and partially decentralized" database?

If the answer is yes, then that's basically the steelman argument for the long-term viability of complex proof-of-stake blockchains or similar protocols that embed smart contracts into their base layer.

This set of hypothetical partially decentralized databases wouldn't conceptually compete with Bitcoin as a truly decentralized and nearly immutable monetary asset at a geopolitical scale, but could they coexist alongside Bitcoin as semi-open operating systems for apps that benefit from partial auditability or partially decentralized control?

For example, if a database is controlled to some extent by a central organization, but it is open source and it is designed in such a way that its contents can be independently backed-up and audited in real time by certain high-performance external nodes, does that concept have an addressable market? Perhaps for the tokenization of assets? And what about a federated database, meaning a database that requires the cooperation of several large organizations to change, or that requires proof-of-stake by large (and generally oligopolistic) entities, rather than a singular entity? Could that have long-term value?

As of this writing, the normal trading window for U.S. equities is from 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m., five days per week, and adds up to 32.5 hours. Since there are 168 hours in a week, that means that U.S. equities can be traded just 19.3% of the time. From there, they subtract certain holidays, and therefore equities trade around 19% of the time in normal market windows. Wealthier investors can trade in after-hours trading, but with less liquidity. Is it reasonable for entrepreneurs to investigate making equities tradeable the other 81% of the time, too? And for everyone? I think so.

Additionally, equity and other security trades take days to fully settle. The time has come down over the years, but it's still operating on legacy settlement rails.[^361] What if each trade could fully settle in seconds or minutes? And for holders of securities that need liquidity, what if these assets could easily be shopped around for different collateralized borrowing opportunities?

Plus, it's a challenge for most people (at least outside of the upper classes) in developing countries to even access equities and other securities in general. This applies to both their domestic securities as well as to global securities. Online brokerages made it easier starting in the 1990s, and brokerages in the form of mobile apps made it even easier over the past decade, but there is still an access problem --- especially when trying to access equities of a different country. What if traditional securities, such as stocks and bonds from around the world, plus all commodities and currencies as well as real estate or fine art or private businesses or certain digital collectibles, could be tokenized and accessible to anyone in the world with a smartphone, tradeable 24/7 across multiple different exchanges, fully settle within minutes, and be usable as collateral on multiple different liquidity platforms? Much like stablecoins, they would still be centrally issued, but the liability side would be a digital bearer asset, and a rather efficient one at that.

Lastly, what if smaller businesses could securitize their equity more easily? What if everyone in a community could invest in a new startup restaurant nearby, in exchange for some equity token that gives them a share of profits, or discounts or perks for frequent patronage? This fits well with a hard money world; if most things are equity-financed rather than debt-financed, shouldn't it be easier via technology for even small entities to issue startup equity, and to be able to use that equity as collateral when needed?

Tokenizing the claims to real-world traditional assets in some form or another seems to be a reasonable expectation, and it would represent an upgrade to the tech rails that existing securities operate on. Some developers propose that this sort of technology should exist on Bitcoin sidechains. Other developers propose that separate dedicated base layer blockchains are best for this. Still other developers propose that a blockchain isn't really needed for this and that other types of distributed ledgers could provide the same functionality for centralized security issuers.

From my perspective, proof-of-stake smart contract blockchains or blockchain-like protocols are operating system equities (i.e., securities), competing among themselves for network efficiency and reliability. There may be a global market for them when it comes to efficiently enabling the issuance of security tokens, similar to how exchange companies or tech platform companies operate today. I don't have a firm view on this matter other than that they are not well-suited to being robust global money, due to their lack of an unforgeable history.

A big problem in recent years has been that so many venture capitalists and early developers keep dumping low quality unregistered cryptocurrency projects on retail investors, like how boiler room operators dumped bad penny stocks on retail investors in the 1990s. In normal venture capital investing, founders and investors lock up capital for 5-10 years before obtaining exit liquidity for the startup company that they financed. Their financial success is heavily tied to the success of the fundamentals of the business. For the founders and early investors to get most of their liquidity out, either the startup company goes through the process of becoming publicly traded, and thus provides an extensive set of disclosures and risk analysis, or the company becomes purchased by a larger company and vetted by their professional analysts and auditors, or they sell private shares to another accredited investor in a private deal. However, with cryptocurrency, a lot of founders and venture capitalists have resorted to "fast exit liquidity" where they lock up coins for a couple years, get them listed on an exchange, hype them up with their own marketing efforts, and then dump them on retail investors without disclosures. This violates the securities laws of many jurisdictions and allows the founders and venture capitalists to walk away rich even if the project flops a few years after it begins.

In other words, just like how the internet made it easier for people to produce and distribute their own books and songs, smart contracts have made it easier for people to produce and distribute their own financial assets. And while this removal or diminishment of the "gatekeeper" can indeed be empowering, it also lengthens the long tail of low-quality items that make it out into the marketplace, which potential customers need to take into account. Worse yet, newly issued financial assets have a much larger potential to be outright scams than books or songs or other types of content, and thus can be more harmful to people that fall for them. As a result, years of cryptocurrency token issuance have had less impact on the creation of real goods and services than Kickstarter campaigns and similar types of crowdfunding have had.

For this reason, after enough scams I think most potential users of security tokens will come to understand that most of them are worthless, and that a security token with real value is likely to be one that is acknowledged by some registration authority (for large businesses) or that they know first-hand, such as a local business (for small businesses).

**Energy as the Arbiter of Truth**

Prior to the invention of proof-of-work and especially prior to the invention of Bitcoin, everything that was digital was almost freely copyable. In fact, that was the main feature, rather than a bug. That's where software's massive productivity enhancement comes from; the digitization of things allows for the increased proliferation of those things at a negligible marginal cost.

If someone expends time and resources to create a book, song, picture, movie, game, application, or other digital thing, then the difference in cost to distribute it to a hundred people, a thousand people, a million people, or a billion people, is almost negligible.

This impressive feature does, however, create some problems. For example, software companies have spent decades trying to figure out how to make sure only paying customers get access to their products and have used various things like software license keys or cloud-based accounts to minimize unlicensed usage. Similarly, the easy and global spread of digital music files forever changed the economics of the music industry. Digital piracy has been a concern for content producers of all types for decades.

Internet spam became another problem. If it is costless to send an email, post a message, or create an account, then how do we prevent someone from abusing this feature, or writing a program to do it repeatedly at superhuman speed? That type of spam is what Adam Back invented Hashcash back in the 1990s to try to solve; digital interaction was so frictionless that he invented the proof-of-work concept to purposely give it a little bit of friction back, to impose a micro-cost on certain digital actions when it is appropriate to do so.

A related problem to spam is impersonation. Anyone can create an online account on a given platform and claim to be someone that they are not. Bots can be programmed to do this automatically by the thousands. Given sufficient programming, artificial intelligence can allow people to spin up entire fake communities, with unique personalities and fake followers of those personalities. This could happen in the trillions, and far outstrip the number of actual humans interacting online.

Here in the 2020s as an active user of social media with a large following of well over half a million people, I encounter spam and impersonation constantly. It's remarkable how unsolved this problem has been for decades at this point. My posts on Twitter immediately get flooded with dozens of automatic bot replies that seem like they should be filterable but thus far have been resilient against such attempts to filter them. People pretend to be me on Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, and other platforms. I have contacted social media companies to successfully delete hundreds of false accounts of people claiming to be me, but they pop up as fast as I can have them deleted. Some of those accounts have successfully scammed people, by offering them access to some "exclusive" investment opportunity while pretending to be me, and then just taking their money and disappearing.

And now that artificial intelligence is making the creation of pictures, videos, texts, programs, and other things almost costless, it's hard to know what content is genuine compared to what is a high-quality fake video or personality. When we see a picture or a video that might be important from a corporate, social, political, or geopolitical perspective, how can we know that it is actual footage rather than an AI-generated digital forgery?

Michael Saylor, who is the co-founder and executive chairman of MicroStrategy and has a larger social media presence than me, has faced an impersonation problem on a larger scale than I have. He has often described fake bot accounts online as "ghosts" since you can't really know if they are real or not, and he has proposed the usage of the Bitcoin network and associated proof-of-work mechanisms to filter out spam and impersonation. In a 2022 speech, he described the implications for Bitcoin and proof-of-work rather visually:

> Most people don't realize this, but Satoshi opened a portal from the physical realm into the digital realm. And energy began to flow into cyberspace, bringing life to a formally dead realm consisting only of shadows and ghosts. Bringing conservation of energy and matter, objectivity, truth, time, and consequence into the digital realm, delivering property rights, freedom, and sovereignty that is separate from the physical and the political realm, to humanity.[^362]

The Bitcoin network uses the input of energy to eliminate the need for centralized human governance, at least for money and certain other forms of information. The input of energy, in the form of processing power, allows for anonymous computers and their operators around the world to work together to build and maintain a global ledger, with an objective sequence of events. The network's proposal is simple and nearly uncontestable: The blockchain with the most processing power embedded into it, and that also follows the consensus rules as determined by the distributed network nodes, is the official ledger.

In other words, Bitcoin is a network where humans let energy be the arbiter of truth for transaction processing, rather than a centralized entity like a bank or a technology company or a government. It's automated accounting, and represents a ledger suitable for the 21st century. Other digital realms that we interact with can be connected to the Bitcoin network in various ways to inherit some of its scarcity, so that they can benefit from the borderless flow of value and connect with a reliable record of past events, while reducing spam and impersonation.

For example, someone can create a public/private key pair, embed the public key into the Bitcoin blockchain with a real-world resource cost due to transaction fees, verify to many people in person that this key is indeed theirs, and use their private key that goes along with that public key to sign any digital content that they create or authorize. The same is true for any large journalist organization with known integrity standards. From that point on, this allows people to differentiate forgeries from genuine content (at least to the extent that it was created by that individual or organization, not necessarily that it's objectively true), and it makes it so that a million impersonators cannot use similar key pairs that have been embedded, with real-world expense, into the Bitcoin blockchain.

In a world of sufficiently advanced artificial intelligence and virtually costless impersonation or forgeries, we might learn to demand proof-of-continuity (cryptographic public/private key pairs) and proof-of-work (evidence that real-world resources were expended to add weight to a given public/private key pair), before taking certain types of digital content seriously.

Additionally, certain information might be deemed important enough that it's worth paying transaction fees to embed it directly into the Bitcoin blockchain, which allows that information to be accessible in a provably unaltered way for as long as the network continues to exist.


## Footnotes

[^351]: These sections draw on Lyn Alden, "Proof-of-Stake and Stablecoins: A Blockchain Centralization Dilemma"; and Alden, "Bitcoin's Energy Usage Isn't a Problem. Here's Why."

[^352]: van Wirdum, *The Genesis Book*, ch. 15; Gladstein, *Financial Privilege*, 24--33.

[^353]: Tanzeel Akhtar and Sidharta Shukla, "China Makes a Comeback in Bitcoin Mining Despite Government Ban," *Bloomberg*, May 17, 2022.

[^354]: Satoshi Nakamoto, "Re: Bitcoin Minting is Thermodynamically Perverse," BitcoinTalk forum, August 7, 2010.

[^355]: Nakamoto, "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System," 1.

[^356]: Hugo Nguyen, "Work is Timeless, Stake is Not," *Medium*, October 12, 2018.

[^357]: Nakamoto, "Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System," 1.

[^358]: Hugo Nguyen, "Proof-of-Stake, Private Keys Attacks and Unforgeable Costliness the Unsung Hero," *Medium*, April 3, 2008.

[^359]: Gigi, "A Failure to Understand Proof of Work," *Twitter*, May 13, 2021.

[^360]: Lyn Alden, "What is Money, Anyway?"

[^361]: Carla Tardi, "Settlement Period: Definition, Process, SEC Rules," *Investopedia*, March 17, 2023.

[^362]: Michael Saylor, "GALA 2022 Keynote Speech."

