# Chapter 26: **Cryptocurrency Risk Analysis**

Readers of this part of the book who have not previously been bullish or interested in Bitcoin may be thinking, "some of this is neat, but I don't think it'll work in the long run." If that is your view, you're in good company with the author. I think it's a healthy and natural response to be skeptical of the long-term financial value of this technology.

Gold has been used as money for thousands of years. Government-issued or bank-issued paper currencies and centralized ledger systems have been used as media of exchange for centuries. Bitcoin is a relatively niche software network that has been running since 2009. Let's not get ahead of ourselves here.

When I first heard about Bitcoin back in 2010 or 2011, I was interested but skeptical. It barely had a market price back then. The innovation was fascinating to me, but I didn't acquire any coins. I knew of an engineer who was mining it on her high-performance gaming computer, and I briefly considered using my gaming computer to do the same. But like many things in life, I just never got around to it, and eventually forgot about it. It was not important or convincing enough to me to grab my attention in a way that was meaningful enough to incite action.

And then in 2013, I encountered the idea again as it went up in price dramatically. I re-examined it, and once again appreciated the innovation. I looked at some of the cryptocurrency exchanges to perhaps buy a little bit, but they seemed rather sketchy and risky to me. I made a mental note to put more time into researching how to safely buy some next week and then again, I just forgot about it and was busy with other things in life. I was not inherently convinced enough to act.

In late 2017 after it had appreciated in price considerably again, I published a public research article on bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. I described their operation to a general investing audience and put forth several potential valuation methods for them.[^388] I once again concluded that I would avoid buying any for the time being. This ended up being a good decision: It was near the top of one of bitcoin's several price bubbles, and the returns were rather poor for the next three years.

My primary hesitation from the very beginning was that it seemed to me like anyone could just copy the code and create a different blockchain money. With precious metals, each one is scarce, and there are only a handful of different types. With blockchain monies, anyone with a bit of coding experience can copy one of the existing ones, change a few variables, and release it. Therefore, although there will only ever be 21 million bitcoin, the concept can experience supply inflation and dilution by the introduction of countless new blockchain monies. If the market share becomes and remains highly fragmented between countless blockchains, then perhaps none of them will persistently maintain any significant purchasing power, liquidity, or security. Plus, I considered there to be risks associated with government bans, software bugs, and arbitrary changes to the rules of the network.

However, unlike my initial observations of the network in 2011 and 2013, I kept watching the network closely after 2017, including through the bear market of 2018 and 2019. When the price of bitcoin crashed in early 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic after already having been in a long bear market, I recommended it as an allocation to readers of my investment research website and bought a significant amount myself. I've been structurally optimistic on the network ever since, even as I do acknowledge various risks associated with the concept's long-term survival.

The primary event that made me more interested in Bitcoin was the resolution of the "Blocksize War." From 2015 through 2017, there had been vigorous debate in the Bitcoin ecosystem about whether the maximum block size should be increased with a hard fork or not, meaning a change to the consensus rules that is not backward-compatible with existing nodes. Different factions struggled with each other to shape the design of the protocol, and to see who had the power (developers, corporate miners/exchanges, or individual users/nodes). It was a real-world test of Bitcoin's level of decentralization. In other words, it was a "constitutional crisis" for the Bitcoin network, and it passed the test.

Ever since the network's early history, there was a growing divide between people who wanted to increase the block size and people who wanted to keep it small. Increasing the block size allows the network to process more transactions per unit of time (not considering layer two solutions and sidechain solutions, which weren't fully developed yet). However, increasing the block size also increases the bandwidth and data storage and processing power required to run a full node, and thus puts it out of the reach of the everyday user on a laptop. If users can neither mine nor operate a full node themselves, they must trust large-scale network providers, and Bitcoin would cease to be a permissionless, decentralized peer-to-peer system. It would permanently weaken the consensus function of the node network.

Even Satoshi himself played a dual role in this debate as early as 2010; he's the one that personally added the block size limit after the network was already running, but also discussed how it could potentially be increased over time for better scaling as global bandwidth access improves. After the seeds of this disagreement were laid from the protocol's inception, and with Satoshi long gone, it was from 2015 through 2017 that the Blocksize War went into full conflict.

At one point in 2017, over 80% of miner processing power, the biggest maker of bitcoin mining equipment, the prior lead developer of the Bitcoin network, and several major custodians and exchanges, favored increasing the block size with an upgrade called SegWit2x (not to be confused with the SegWit update). That represented an overwhelming amount of support among the corporate-level players in the industry, or as they described themselves in their New York Agreement, they were "a critical mass of the bitcoin ecosystem."[^389]

And yet they failed, and the attempt was aborted. This showed how much power individual node operators have, and showed how hard it is to push unwanted updates to the userbase. It answered the question of "who controls the ledger?"

Multiple separate hard forks were attempted after that. Bitcoin Cash became the most famous hard fork with a bigger block size, and as of this writing its market capitalization is less than 0.5% of Bitcoin's market capitalization. A minority hard fork could simply not compete with the real Bitcoin network.

As I described in a prior chapter, trying do a hard fork from Bitcoin is like copying all the data from Wikipedia and hosting it on your own website, and then getting very little traffic because you don't have the millions of backlinks that point to the real Wikipedia, or the volunteer army of people that constantly update the real Wikipedia. Your split version of Wikipedia would be inherently worse than the real one from the moment you copy it due to its weaker network effect. Similarly, any minority hard fork of Bitcoin inherently has far fewer nodes and far less miner computation, making it less decentralized and less censorship-resistant. That's the problem that Bitcoin Cash and other hard forks ran into.

It\'s not impossible for Bitcoin to one day perform a successful hard fork, but a hard fork can only be done with overwhelming consensus by the users if there is a critical issue, and not by a consortium of corporations or minority factions.

From 2020 through 2023, I met with a number of Bitcoin Core developers, several Lightning developers, the builders of other scaling solutions, several billionaires who hold sizable amounts of bitcoin, several founders of exchanges and Bitcoin ecosystem companies, several venture capital firms that financed those companies, several authors of the top-selling Bitcoin-related books, the inventor of Hashcash (proof-of-work), and several human rights activists from various authoritarian countries that use bitcoin and stablecoins. While I was at the Oslo Freedom Forum, I was asked to present as a subject matter expert about Bitcoin's energy usage in the Norwegian parliament building to several parliament members and did so. I also presented to members of the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions in Canada about Bitcoin's energy usage as well. I participated in several conferences and countless podcast interviews associated with the subject and wrote several research articles about it. In 2021, I joined the board of directors of a bitcoin-native financial services company called Swan.com. In 2022, I became a founding advisor to egodeath.capital, a venture fund that provides capital to bitcoin-related startup companies and have worked closely with them ever since.

Throughout this process, I immersed myself deep into the Bitcoin ecosystem, constantly learning. My goal was to explore the various possibilities of this technology as it relates to the evolution of money, while also evaluating the risks and repercussions associated with it.

What made me go from an interested skeptic of the technology to someone who spends a significant portion of my time analyzing and working within the ecosystem, was that each of what I considered to be major risks was completely or partially addressed. I consider there to still be many risks, but as it stands today, I view the technology to likely be powerful enough to overcome them. This chapter will focus on outlining what I have considered to be the major risk categories associated with the Bitcoin network and other cryptocurrencies, and how I see them as manageable or mitigated, but still present.

**Risk 1: Market Dilution**

The first risk that I identified was that of market dilution. If people keep making new cryptocurrencies, then what stops the entire market from being heavily diluted and fractured? There is no assurance that one or two cryptocurrencies will emerge as the most salable, and therefore accumulate most of the monetary premium among the infinite number of potential coins.

In practice, however, Bitcoin has been the largest cryptocurrency by market capitalization for 14 consecutive years, and only Ethereum has come anywhere close to it at certain points of time. Nothing else is remotely on the same scale. Once a well-designed cryptocurrency becomes large, its security and depth of liquidity overshadows everything else.

As of this writing, Bitcoin has over 90% of the market value of all proof-of-work blockchains. Of those, it has by far the largest computational processing power, meaning that it's the most secure against censorship attacks. Even if a large proof-of-stake network were to surpass Bitcoin in market value during a certain period, I would still consider Bitcoin to be uncontested at what it specifically does, which is to build a decentralized ledger with an unforgeable history.

Because Bitcoin nodes are small and easy to run by design, Bitcoin has by far the greatest number of active nodes out of any cryptocurrency. Every trade-off that other cryptocurrencies make in order to be more expressive or to have higher transaction throughput, generally results in larger node requirements and therefore fewer nodes and less decentralization. If individuals don't have a realistic option to run their own node, then the privacy and the censorship-resistance of the blockchain are heavily impaired.

Protocols in general tend to consolidate toward one dominant standard and maintain that hold for decades or longer, due to network effects. There were competing protocol stacks for the internet, for example. However, once a protocol emerges as dominant, it generally becomes a virtuous cycle of more and more usage. The introduction of any competing protocol starts at a massive disadvantage, because it is not compatible with most applications and devices on the market. Only if a new protocol is an order of magnitude superior would it have any chance of competing against an established protocol; it can't just be marginally better.[^390] Plus, the dominant protocols can and do upgrade over time in a backwards-compatible way, which is how they remain relevant over long periods of time.

However, although the design space is very tight (i.e., most improvements make worse trade-offs as far as we know), there is no absolute guarantee that Bitcoin won't be outcompeted or surpassed in some way, and this must be considered a risk. However, there is currently no identifiable competition on the horizon at any similar level of scale, liquidity, security, and immutability. The only comparable network in terms of size is Ethereum, which in many ways is categorically different.

Someone analyzing this space should research the various trade-offs for themselves, and monitor the health of Bitcoin's network effect, market share, and technical capabilities. Large numbers of small illiquid coins can lower Bitcoin's market share in theory, but in practice, only the top couple dozen coins matter in terms of salability, and of those, only the proof-of-work coins have an unforgeable history.

**Risk 2: Critical Software Bugs**

In 2010 when it was still brand new and barely had a market price, the Bitcoin node client had an inflation bug, which Satoshi fixed with a soft fork.

In 2013, a Bitcoin node client update was accidentally not backward-compatible with the prior (and widely used) node client due to an oversight, resulting in an unintended chain split. Within hours, developers analyzed the problem and told node operators to fall back to the prior node client, which resolved the chain split. Since that time over a decade ago, the Bitcoin network has enjoyed 100% perfect uptime. Even Fedwire has encountered outages and failed to achieve 100% uptime during that period (and doesn't even attempt to run 24/7/365 to begin with like Bitcoin does).

In 2018, another inflation bug was accidentally added to the Bitcoin node client. However, this one was identified and discreetly fixed by developers before it was exploited, and so it never caused an issue in practice.

In 2023, people began making use of the SegWit and Taproot soft fork upgrades in ways that were not intended by the developers of those upgrades, including inserting large images into the signature portion of the Bitcoin blockchain. While this is not a bug per se, it shows the risks of how certain aspects of the code can be used in ways that were not intended, and therefore shows the ongoing need for conservatism when performing upgrades in the future.

Bitcoin suffers from the "year 2038 problem" that many computer systems have. During the year 2038, the 32-bit integer used for Unix timestamping will run out of seconds for many computer systems, resulting in an error. However, because Bitcoin uses an unsigned integer for this, it won't run out until the year 2106. This can be fixed by updating the time to a 64-bit integer or by taking the block height into account when interpreting the wrapped-around 32-bit integer, but as far as I understand it this may require a hard fork, which means an upgrade that is backward-incompatible. This shouldn't be hard in practice because it's obviously necessary and can be done well in advance of the problem (years or decades even), but it may open a window of vulnerability. One potential way to do it would be to release an update that is backward-compatible at first, but that activates when the integer runs out and thus solves the problem.

The point of these examples is that Bitcoin and every other cryptocurrency consists of software code written by fallible humans. Bitcoin is purposely simple by design and therefore maintains a smaller, tighter, and more auditable codebase than other cryptocurrencies, but its history is not perfect.

For this reason, when developers release a new update, many node operators are purposely slow to update to it. Developers cannot "push" updates to node operators, which is what makes the system functionally decentralized and immutable, and therefore minimizes the power that developers have. Node operators get to decide if they will update, and in practice it's best to wait a while for more code reviews and more time in operation to ensure that it's without critical bugs. If a small portion of the node network updates and a bug is found, they can just roll back to the prior version. However, if a bug goes undetected for a long time and most of the nodes on the network update to it, and *then* it is exploited, that could be disastrous. A fix for that could include a soft fork, and there may be disputes about how to fix it quickly, resulting in chain splits that are not resolved easily. This could damage the reputation of the network as being reliable and set it back many years.

The entire point of Bitcoin is that it provides the node operator with monetary self-sovereignty. It allows the node operator to send and receive transactions without any central entity's permission. The core ruleset is immutable in practice; nobody can force them to update their node, and their node does not allow for the faster creation of coins, or the number of coins to exceed 21 million, or for larger block sizes.

However, monetary self-sovereignty is a Platonic ideal that can only be asymptotically approached; it can never actually be reached in practice. No matter how simple Bitcoin is by design, it can never be proven to be bug-free. Most people will not audit for themselves every line of code for their Bitcoin node client, and even if they do, they could miss a bug just like the developers have sometimes done. If a node operator is forced to hastily update to a new version because their version was found to have a bug, and it's unworkable to fall back to prior versions (perhaps those ones have the same undetected bug), then it temporarily removes the node operator's monetary self-sovereignty and could persistently damage confidence in the network.

**Risk 3: Government Bans**

Bitcoin is stateless money, and many parts of "the State" don't necessarily like the fact that it exists.

Governments around the world have various banking laws that allow them to monitor bank transactions and freeze accounts. More importantly, governments benefit from seigniorage; they can fix budget deficits by printing more currency to fill the difference, and thus dilute everyone's savings by a little bit at a time in a non-transparent manner. Governments whose debt is denominated in their own currency can never nominally default against their will; they can always create more currency. Their constraints in practice are inflation and public unrest, and their currency can unravel if enough people lose faith in it.

Many authoritarian countries are unattractive places for citizens to keep their wealth, and so citizens want to move their wealth offshore to freer countries with better rule of law for safekeeping. These authoritarian governments therefore do their best to limit capital outflows by controlling the currency and the banking system.

Stateless money allows people to save in a monetary asset that is not issued by a government, and that has a large cost to censor (gaining and maintaining over 50% of the processing power of the global network). It provides a method for portable, self-custodial, peer-to-peer value transfer outside of the banking system. Rather than only wealthy people having offshore bank accounts, Bitcoin gives access to the functional equivalent of an offshore bank account to anyone with a smartphone, except without counterparty risk.

People often think of bitcoin competing with dollars and euros and gold, but the more immediate threat is that it competes with the long tail of the 100+ weakest, smallest, periphery currencies first. Argentinians, for example, scramble for dollar stablecoins, bitcoin, and related assets much more significantly than Norwegians do. Bitcoin and stablecoins threaten the money-printing privileges of many countries, starting with the weakest and going up from there. Governments, however, have various methods to push back on this.

Firstly, governments can sever known cryptocurrency exchanges or brokers from their nation's banking system, through legislation or through informal pressure. A government or central bank can tell all banks that they are not allowed to let customers transfer money to any cryptocurrency exchange or broker or provide banking services to a cryptocurrency-related company. This is very easy for a government to enforce, is a form of capital control, and it limits the speed with which value can flow out of the nation's banking system and into bitcoin, stablecoins, or other cryptocurrencies. During the end of long-term debt cycles when sovereign debt needs to be inflated away, capital controls are a common practice by governments. As a country's public ledger (fiat currency) gets heavily diluted, lawmakers do their best to force people to remain within the ledger as it burns down rather than fleeing to other ledgers.

We already saw partial forms of this in the United States in 2022 and 2023 when many cryptocurrency companies were de-banked due to regulatory pressure. Furthermore, some banks that failed in the banking crisis of 2023 had cryptocurrency assets that were disallowed from being acquired by the banks that bought the remnants of those failed banks. Custodia, which is a Wyoming-chartered bank led by Caitlin Long, warned regulators about some of the banking crises that were likely coming in 2023. And yet Custodia's application for an account at the Federal Reserve was denied, even though they wanted to hold 108% of cash deposits in reserves. There has been a clear push against several types of cryptocurrency-related companies and their ability to maintain reliable connections with financial institutions.

However, even the more severe practice of completely banning banks from sending fiat currency to cryptocurrency exchanges isn't a complete solution for governments, because people can still exchange value peer-to-peer. One prominent example is Nigeria, which has severed cryptocurrency exchanges and brokers from its banking system, but still has one of the highest cryptocurrency adoption rates in the world among its population. A Nigerian can still send money to another Nigerian, and that second Nigerian can send them bitcoin in return. People and businesses can become peer-to-peer brokers, using various ways of accessing bitcoin globally and selling it for a spread to their fellow citizens. There are platforms and marketplaces that help line up buyers and sellers, along with multi-signature escrow services or reputation systems to reduce fraud. It's very hard for a bank to determine that some random payment from one person to another was in exchange for bitcoin, stablecoins, or other cryptocurrency. Additionally, Nigerians that perform remote work for people in other countries, such as programming, graphic design, or virtual assistance, can elect to be paid in bitcoin or stablecoins. Similarly, Nigerians that receive remittances from family in other countries can receive that remittance in bitcoin or stablecoins.

Secondly, governments can react with all sorts of draconian regulations. They can try to tax cryptocurrencies to death. They can make it illegal or impossibly difficult to operate a known cryptocurrency business.

Thirdly and most severely, governments can outright ban it among the public. They can make it illegal to run a Bitcoin node or own any cryptocurrency under threat of imprisonment, for example. For four decades in the United States, from the 1930s to the 1970s, it was punishable by up to a decade in prison for Americans to own gold. Governments take their control over the public ledger very seriously, and attempts by people to take back their own monetary sovereignty to prevent their savings from being debased can be heavily punished.

The problem with these second and third solutions is that they are hard to enforce on a large scale if trust breaks down. People had a lot of trust in the U.S. federal government during the period between the 1930s and 1970s when gold was illegal to own, and that law was passed when there was a rare supermajority in Congress. For better or worse --- depending on how you see it --- most people went along with this collectivism. Today in the U.S. and many places, that type of harmony doesn't exist. And while it's easy to impose restrictions on the banking system, it's hard to impose restrictions on individual users. For example, during the era of banned gold, authorities didn't go door-to-door looking for gold, which would be an expensive and dangerous process. Bitcoin is free, open-source, non-malicious software that people can download and run on a basic laptop. Bitcoin is the act of people updating a decentralized global spreadsheet with each other. At an even more basic level, someone can own bitcoin by flipping a coin 256 times to generate a private key and using that to receive bitcoin payments. How does the government stop that or know it belongs to them, especially if enough people do it?

Some governments have strong speech-related laws around this as well. In the 1990s, the United States government tried to crack down on the usage of open-source peer-to-peer encryption, but when the code was published in book form, it was considered a form of speech and protected by the First Amendment, which is purposely very hard to change or get around.

Regardless, many governments can and will try to limit the usage of bitcoin, stablecoins, and other cryptocurrencies to varying extents. So far, governments seem especially concerned with people self-custodying cryptocurrencies and using them privately, because that is what really threatens their control. People owning cryptocurrencies in domestic custodians is not a significant threat, because they are siloed under government control like the banking system already is, and a government can simply tell the custodian that they are not allowed to let people withdraw their coins or can demand that they be handed over to the government.

Just like alcohol usage under prohibition, bitcoin usage is hard to stamp out entirely; it can only be pushed into the black market and made difficult to use. Plus, users of the network tend to respond to attacks on it; multi-country bans would likely result in accelerated adoption of privacy-related technologies in the upper layers of the Bitcoin network and a proliferation of peer-to-peer marketplaces.

Countries that are desperate enough to ban or restrict ownership or usage of bitcoin and other digital assets (and thus limit their ability to attract and retain companies that are participating in this new technology) are likely to do so because they have a severe currency problem or capital flight problem. A willingness for a country to ban the usage of what is basically just a decentralized spreadsheet is often an advertisement for why people in that country likely need it. A country with a robust currency, strong property rights, and where capital wants to be, is unlikely to ban bitcoin. A country dealing with a severe mismanagement of its public ledger is more likely to try to ban bitcoin, or at least add a lot of friction to it.

As Parts 3 and 4 of this book showed, the existing monetary systems are increasingly unstable, and designed to build up entropy over time. If indeed they encounter more severe problems, users of bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies should expect blame to be put on them, as though they somehow caused the existing monetary systems to become destabilized. A counter to that would be to point out that if the mere existence of an open-source software ledger threatens the existing system, then clearly, there's a problem with the existing system rather than this new technology. To argue that a decentralized spreadsheet is a threat to the existing system is, at its core, an admission of failure regarding the existing system. Hundreds of trillions of dollars in credit exists globally that can't be paid back in terms of full purchasing power, and social promises have been accumulated to a point where they can't be made whole in their current forms without big tax increases or cuts to other spending. As these things start to break down, people will naturally want to look for someone to blame, and holders of bitcoin are one of the potential scapegoats to point to.

**Risk 4: Computational Threats**

Bitcoin miners use the SHA-256 hashing algorithm to generate new blocks of transactions for the blockchain. Any normal processor can technically do this, including laptop CPUs for example. In the early days of the network, that was how it was done. However, as bitcoin mining became a large industry, engineers developed more specialized processors to optimize its efficiency. For well-defined processing tasks, application-specific integrated circuits ("ASICs") are far more efficient than a general processor at solving that task once they are designed and produced.

Nowadays, the only way to mine bitcoin in practice is to get ASICs that are specifically designed to do it. There is no amount of general computing that can economically mine bitcoin. If Amazon, Microsoft, and Google were to turn the entirety of their combined cloud server infrastructure toward mining bitcoin or trying to perform a 51% censorship attack on the network, they wouldn't even make a dent. The millions of specialized ASICs around the world that spend all day mining bitcoin are orders of magnitude more powerful for this specific task, which is to guess numbers as quickly as possible for as little electricity per guess as possible.

Therefore, there are some risks associated with the processing equipment involved in bitcoin mining.

Firstly, there are only a handful of top-end chip foundries in the world, which is where various semiconductor products including ASICs are made. On top of that, there are only a handful of companies that currently design SHA-256 ASICs. Therefore, there is a supply chain bottleneck risk associated with making and obtaining bitcoin mining processors.

As of this writing, several large and well-capitalized companies are currently working to diversify the design and fabrication of SHA-256 ASICs. So, this risk can be mitigated, but combined with the prior risk about government bans, supply chain bottlenecks are a realistic threat to monitor.

Secondly, if some entity manages to create a sharply superior ASIC and retains a monopoly on its use, they could pose a censorship threat by outclassing the rest of the processing power on the network. The improvements in ASICs are slowing down, and processors in general (not just ASICs) are likely getting close to the physical limits of Moore's law, where it becomes harder and harder to make meaningful improvements. Transistors are so small now that they are starting to bump into atomic limits. It's hard to envision a much better ASIC that could overwhelm the rest of the network, but the possibility must be considered since there could be some major stepwise development in computing.

Similarly, quantum computing is a long-term possibility. The development and deployment of sufficiently advanced quantum computers may be able to determine a private key from a public key, which is not remotely possible for traditional processors. If that occurs, then it would begin breaking the security assurances of the Bitcoin network. There are, however, possible upgrades to prevent this. Specifically, quantum-hard algorithms can be utilized, but that would require at least a soft fork and perhaps a hard fork and will likely increase the bandwidth and storage requirements per transaction.

Some types of far-out technologies, such as nuclear fusion or quantum computing are often discussed but historically have not come close to fruition. Scientists and journalists occasionally create brief glimmers of them, such as reports about micro-nuclear reactions or tiny quantum computers, but it's a very different thing for these technologies to be developed and deployed in practice. However, we must analyze them and be prepared for their eventual arrival if signs begin to mount toward that reality. Any type of new processing capacity that can break parts of Bitcoin's encryption would be a major threat that requires an answer. And more broadly, it would be a threat to the entire internet and the entire existing banking system as well, since they all use similar types of encryption.

Third, a government could try to censor the network. The annual military budget of the United States is over \$800 billion, and China's annual military budget is over \$250 billion. It currently requires billions of dollars to attempt a sustained 51% censorship attack on the Bitcoin network, and these entities have the capital to do it if they were to try it. Such a proposal probably wouldn't go over well politically (imagine the negative publicity in the United States if it was known that the Pentagon was spending billions of taxpayer dollars, at a time of record fiscal deficits, to attack the Bitcoin network), and the network could respond to the threat with higher transaction fees to pay more miners to come online and un-censor it. But such an attack is not outside of the realm of possibility. Even just spending a few billion dollars to spam the network for years, making it harder and more costly to use, is something that a large government or military can do. Doing so, however, would enlarge and strengthen the bitcoin miners via higher transaction fee revenue, who can advocate for the network politically and through other means. High base-layer fees also tend to accelerate the adoption of second layer technologies to make more efficient use of block space.

Overall, we can imagine several risks occurring together to combine into a rather serious threat. Governments could ban or severely restrict usage of the Bitcoin network, force various financial institutions to sell their holdings to crash the price, and drive the technology into the black market. From there, they could go after the supply chain and do their best to prevent the construction and distribution of new SHA-256 ASICs. If bitcoin's price remains low for a long time, many miners would become unprofitable and disconnect from the network until the difficulty adjustment reduced enough to find a new steady state. This would sharply reduce the cost of attempting a 51% censorship attack, and at that point perhaps some large government entity would spend the resources to do it, for the sake of eliminating the threat of stateless money entirely.

The bigger and more widely held the Bitcoin network is, the harder it is for governments to perform this type of multi-front attack. In the United States, for example, there are already senators and representatives that own bitcoin and that express approval of the Bitcoin network. However, as of this writing, bitcoin and cryptocurrencies in general are still only held by a minority of people, and therefore I see an ongoing window for governments to push back and slow down adoption of this technology. The Bitcoin network is very robust, but one of the reasons I write about it is to educate people about the nuances of how it works and how it may be helpful, so that it can be given as much breathing room as possible to survive and thrive while its surrounding ecosystem develops into maturity.


## Footnotes

[^388]: Lyn Alden, "How to Value Bitcoin and Other Cryptocurrencies."

[^389]: Bier, *Blocksize War*, 172--73.

[^390]: William Luther, "Cryptocurrencies, Network Effects, and Switching Costs."

