# Chapter 27: **Stablecoins and Central Bank Digital Currencies**

Blockchains and blockchain-like ledger networks allow fiat currencies to be deployed in more digitally native ways.

So far, this has taken two primary forms: private issuers of fiat-collateralized redeemable tokens (known as "stablecoins") and digital versions of currencies issued directly by central banks (known as "central bank digital currencies" or "CBDCs" for short). This chapter explores the applications and risks associated with these technologies.

**Stablecoin Applications and Risks**

The first stablecoin was developed in 2014 and was deployed on a layer on top of the Bitcoin network. Since then, many stablecoins have emerged, and they have migrated to other blockchains.

The way that a fiat-collateralized stablecoin works is that someone wires currency (usually U.S. dollars) via the legacy banking system to the stablecoin issuer, and the stablecoin issuer generates new stablecoin tokens and sends them back to the person who wired in the dollars. The new stablecoin holder can then move these tokens on the blockchain they are interested in, and use them for savings, payments, trading, leveraging, or other applications, 24 hours per day, seven days per week, 365 days per year in custodial and non-custodial environments.

Someone who has stablecoins can redeem them in large amounts from the issuer, in a process that goes in reverse from how the stablecoins were generated in the first place. The stablecoin holder sends their tokens to the issuer, and the issuer deletes the stablecoins and wires them the currency amount that corresponds to the number of tokens they redeemed.

The issuer can freeze stablecoins associated with specific addresses in response to demands by law enforcement or similar reasons, which makes them inherently centralized. The issuer can make money via creation and redemption fees, and by earning interest on the collateral that they hold. From the issuer's perspective, the stablecoin is a liability for them with an interest rate of zero, and they can invest their fiat collateral in U.S. Treasury securities or similar liquid investments and profit from that spread.

This technology offers some benefits compared to a typical bank account. Mainly, it turns a bank account into a bearer asset; stablecoins can be sent around to different people, and redeemed by someone who is different than the person who originally wired money to the stablecoin issuer. Stablecoins are like digital banknotes.

The original application of stablecoins was that they were used as a dollar unit of account in offshore cryptocurrency exchanges. They are also frequently used as a unit of account and source of leverage in decentralized finance ("DeFi") applications. Outside of trading and leveraging, stablecoins have been used as savings by people who live in countries with major currency crises. For example, many Argentinians use stablecoins. The Argentinian government and banking system has a history of confiscating dollars deposited into the banks, and Argentinians must pay a big mark-up to get their hands on physical cash dollars. However, any Argentinian with a smartphone can access stablecoins, and there isn't much that the Argentinian government can do about it, since the stablecoin issuers are outside of Argentina. The best they can do (and partially have done) is cut off cryptocurrency exchanges from the Argentinian banking system, thereby forcing Argentinians to use peer-to-peer methods or other methods to acquire them. In other words, although a stablecoin has a centralized issuer, the centralized issuer in this case is outside of the jurisdiction that is experiencing the currency crisis. There are many countries in the world where people who want dollars use stablecoins to access them for this reason. To put it simply, people around the world can use the internet and blockchains to partially access the U.S. banking system, and thus go around their local banking systems. Therefore, stablecoins in recent years have been serving as an offshore U.S. dollar bank account for middle-class people rather than just wealthy people.

At the same time, this technology comes with risks. All users of stablecoins must trust the stablecoin issuer to hold all the collateral that they say they do, or else the stablecoin could become unredeemable and collapse in price. This is similar to how we must trust banks --- except in this case the stablecoin industry has been kept largely on the margins by regulators. Additionally, since over 99% of stablecoins are dollar-denominated, and are tied directly or indirectly to a bank in the United States, the U.S. federal government could shut down a stablecoin at any time by sanctioning it and telling the bank that it runs on to freeze the stablecoin issuer's assets. Alternatively, the government that runs the ledger that the stablecoin issuer relies on could tell the stablecoin issuer to freeze certain stablecoin addresses for any legal purpose, such as to target specific users or a specific region of users.

Overall, stablecoins have been increasingly relevant from a monetary perspective because they provide access to U.S. dollars for millions of people around the world who want them but who would otherwise have trouble accessing them. If it becomes easier for people to access any fiat currency they want (or any tokenized asset, more broadly) via their smartphone, then that represents a potential disruption to the current/legacy system of 160 different fiat currencies and capital markets.

**CBDCs: Overview**

The creation of the Bitcoin network, and then privately issued fiat-collateralized stablecoins, inevitably caused governments and their central banks to take notice. Paper banknotes and commercial bank reserves represent liabilities of a country's central bank, and therefore represent the "monetary base" of that country. Many central banks are interested in digitizing their physical banknotes, and thereby making the monetary base of their country an entirely digital ledger.

Agustin Carstens, head of the Switzerland-based Bank for International Settlements (which is owned by central banks around the world and provides them with banking services and regulatory frameworks as a supranational entity), had an interesting quote on central bank digital currencies in a 2020 panel discussion hosted by the IMF and World Bank titled "Cross-Border Payment --- A Vision for the Future":

> For our analysis on CBDC in particular for general use, we tend to establish the equivalence with cash, and there is a huge difference there. For example in cash, we don't know for example who is using a hundred dollar bill today, we don't know who is using a one thousand peso bill today. A key difference with a CBDC is that central bank will have absolute control on the rules and regulations that determine the use of that expression of central bank liability. And also, we will have the technology to enforce that. Those two issues are extremely important, and that makes a huge difference with respect to what cash is.[^391]

In short, central bank digital currencies enhance a central bank's ability to surveil and control the usage of the currency that it issues. This comes with substantial cross-border transaction improvements and more targeted forms of monetary policy, but also opens significant privacy and control issues for the public.

**CBDCs: Cross-Border Settlement**

Cross-border payments remain somewhat of a friction point for the global banking system, despite having been interconnected by telecommunication infrastructure a century and a half ago. Banks have fundamentally used the same legacy international payment mechanisms (e.g., the SWIFT messaging system and transfers among correspondent banks) for half a century, although they've made various superficial technical upgrades over time. International transfers are often slow, expensive, and opaque.

In addition, much of the infrastructure goes through the U.S. banking system, which gives the U.S. considerable power to sanction countries for various reasons. Many governments around the world would like to transact in a more decentralized manner without going through systems controlled by a major hegemonic power that they might not have good relations with.

In autumn 2022, the Bank for International Settlements and several government agencies and central banks announced an international project to upgrade cross-border payment infrastructure. Their website described the project as follows:

> The payment system underpinning cross-border financial flows has not kept pace with rapid growth in global economic integration. The global network of correspondent banks that facilitates international payments is hindered by high costs, low speed and transparency, and operational complexities. Banks are also paring back their correspondent networks and services, leaving many participants (notably emerging market and developing economies) without sufficient or affordable access to the global financial system.
>
> Multiple CBDC (multi-CBDC) arrangements that directly connect jurisdictional digital currencies in a single common technical infrastructure offer significant potential to improve the current system and allow cross-border payments to be immediate, cheap and universally accessible with secure settlement.
>
> The BIS Innovation Hub Hong Kong Centre, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, the Bank of Thailand, the Digital Currency Institute of the People\'s Bank of China and the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates are working together to build such a multi-CBDC platform, known as mBridge.[^392]

Central bank digital currency infrastructure can allow for more efficient methods of making cross-border payments and can route around the world in a complex web of connections that eliminates the ability for any single country to act as a system-wide bottleneck.

**CBDCs: Targeted Monetary and Fiscal Policy**

The United States is a country of 330 million people, and yet the Federal Reserve sets one baseline interest rate for the entire country. This same issue appears in other countries as well.

Critics of central banking generally view the active management of a currency system to be inherently problematic. From their perspective, rather than set interest rates, central banks should have little or no role, and the free market should determine baseline interest rates instead.

Proponents of central banking, including of course the central bankers themselves, are interested in technologies that give them a finer level of control over monetary policy. What if a central bank could adjust interest rates for different regions of the country, or different age groups? If there are certain industries that the central bank wants to expand and other industries that the central bank wants to diminish, the central bank could provide them with very different costs of capital. This could be done on a consumer level as well. Citizens could be given various quotas on various spending categories, and their spending could be automatically throttled back if they exceed those quotas. Stimulus payments could be handed out to targeted groups more quickly and precisely than current technology allows, and in a form of expiring money that incentivizes rapid spending.

This is one of those areas where we must differentiate between the issuer's perspective and the user's perspective with regards to what an "ideal currency" is. Users generally want their currency to be as free, private, and scarce as possible. Issuers generally want their currency to be surveilable, controllable, and to consistently devalue at a smooth pace over time. From the issuer's perspective, the finer tools that they have available to control the details of their currency, the better.

**CBDCs: The Imposition of Negative Interest Rates**

During the global disinflationary bond bubble of the late 2010s decade, many monetary policymakers explored ways to set deeply negative interest rates. They generally view high levels of saving as "hoarding" and instead want that money to be spent faster, thereby boosting the economy in the short term. However, the availability of physical cash makes it hard to impose deeply negative interest rates, because people could withdraw money from their bank account and hold it as physical cash if the bank begins taking money away from them by charging deeply negative depositor interest rates.

A 2019 IMF article called "Cashing in: How to Make Negative Interest Rates Work" describes the issue well:

> In a cashless world, there would be no lower bound on interest rates. A central bank could reduce the policy rate from, say, 2 percent to minus 4 percent to counter a severe recession. The interest rate cut would transmit to bank deposits, loans, and bonds. Without cash, depositors would have to pay the negative interest rate to keep their money with the bank, making consumption and investment more attractive. This would jolt lending, boost demand, and stimulate the economy.
>
> When cash is available, however, cutting rates significantly into negative territory becomes impossible. Cash has the same purchasing power as bank deposits, but at zero nominal interest. Moreover, it can be obtained in unlimited quantities in exchange for bank money. Therefore, instead of paying negative interest, one can simply hold cash at zero interest. Cash is a free option on zero interest, and acts as an interest rate floor.
>
> Because of this floor, central banks have resorted to unconventional monetary policy measures. The euro area, Switzerland, Denmark, Sweden, and other economies have allowed interest rates to go slightly below zero, which has been possible because taking out cash in large quantities is inconvenient and costly (for example, storage and insurance fees). These policies have helped boost demand, but they cannot fully make up for lost policy space when interest rates are very low.
>
> One option to break through the zero lower bound would be to phase out cash.[^393]

Due to the challenges of entirely phasing out cash, however, the authors of the IMF paper that this article was based on instead proposed keeping the monetary base in two parts, where physical cash would devalue vs cash stored in the financial system by a rate that is equivalent to the negative rates applied to deposited cash, so that negative rates are effectively applied to physical cash as well. There would be no escape from deeply nominal negative interest rates, in other words.

NBER Working Paper 25416, published in 2019 and featuring Larry Summers as a co-author, also discussed the issues that paper currency presents against substantially negative-rate policy:

> Second, if the deposit lower bound is overcome, our model predicts that negative policy rates should be an effective way to stimulate the economy. This could happen if banks over time become more willing to experiment with negative deposit rates, and depositors do not substitute to cash, or if there are institutional changes which affect the deposit lower bound. In Section 4 we consider under which conditions this could happen. An example of such policies is a direct tax on paper currency, as proposed first by Gesell (Gesell, 1916) and discussed in detail by Goodfriend (2000) and Buiter and Panigirtzoglou (2003) or actions that increase the storage cost of money, such as eliminating high denomination bills. Another possibility is abolishing paper currency altogether. These policies are discussed in, among others, Agarwal and Kimball (2015), Rogoff (2017a) and Rogoff (2017c), who also suggest more elaborate policy regimes to circumvent the zero lower bound.[^394]

During the latter half of the 2010s decade, which was quite disinflationary for consumer prices, these types of proposals were common in financial academic circles. In an era of low inflation, many policymakers actively explored how to create deeply negative inflation-adjusted interest rates, which from their perspective entailed going ever-deeper into negative nominal interest rates if needed, while trying to eliminate the various escape valves such as physical cash that people could shift toward if those types of policies were to be enacted.[^395] Policymakers, in other words, continued to explore ways to give themselves more and more control over the public ledger.

In the 2020s decade, as higher inflation and higher interest rates have made a comeback, discussions of deeply negative interest rates have so far become less common. However, these proposals may return in future periods of notable disinflation if they should occur, since the desire for greater control of the ledger by policymakers is a recurring theme.

**CBDCs: Law Enforcement Automation**

In 2020, venture capitalist and analyst Nic Carter made the argument on social media that if physical cash was invented today, it would be made illegal. In other words, it's a method of private transactions that we view as normal due to its long-term usage, but one that government agencies and central banks don't really like. Governments have spent decades crafting ever-tighter ways to observe and freeze various bank accounts and transactions, and physical cash represents the largest workaround that people can still use for private transactions within the current financial system.

Central bank digital currencies offer a pathway for central banks to phase out physical cash, and therefore eliminate the last vestige of transaction privacy that their ledgers offer. CBDCs can be surveilled and controlled by the issuer with much better granularity than physical cash can. The same is true for stablecoins.

In 2021, China began testing a central bank digital currency that 1) can more easily track or block transactions, 2) can set up expiration dates on money to ensure it is spent rather than saved, and 3) can automatically deduct money from or freeze accounts associated with individual entities. An April 2021 *Wall Street Journal* article called "China Creates Its Own Digital Currency, a First for Major Economy" summarized the topic well:

> The money itself is programmable. Beijing has tested expiration dates to encourage users to spend it quickly, for times when the economy needs a jump start.
>
> It's also trackable, adding another tool to China's heavy state surveillance. The government deploys hundreds of millions of facial-recognition cameras to monitor its population, sometimes using them to levy fines for activities such as jaywalking. A digital currency would make it possible to both mete out and collect fines as soon as an infraction was detected.[^396]

Since then, several other countries have deployed central bank digital currencies, with Nigeria (a country of over 200 million people) being among the most notable. In autumn 2021, Nigeria launched its central bank digital currency, the eNaira, but a year later it still had an adoption rate within the country below 1%. In late 2022, the central bank began sharply limiting the availability of physical cash. Haruna Musafa, the director of Banking Supervision at the Central Bank of Nigeria wrote that customers "should be encouraged to use alternative channels (internet banking, mobile banking apps, USSD cards/POS, eNaira, etc.) to conduct their banking transactions."[^397]

Bloomberg covered this topic in a December 2022 article called "Nigeria Caps ATM Cash Withdrawals at \$45 Daily to Push Digital Payments":

> The Central Bank of Nigeria capped the maximum customer withdrawal at 20,000 naira (\$44.97) a day, down from the previous limit of 150,000 naira, according to a circular sent to lenders on Tuesday. Weekly cash withdrawals from banks are restricted to 100,000 naira for individuals and 500,000 naira for corporations, and any amount above that limit will attract a fee of 5% and 10%, respectively, the central bank said.
>
> The action is the latest in a string of central bank orders aimed at limiting the use of cash and expand digital currencies to help improve access to banking. In Nigeria's largely informal economy, cash outside banks represents 85% of currency in circulation and almost 40 million adults are without a bank account.[^398]

As this kind of thing shows, physical cash is something that many central banks would prefer to take back if they can, and central bank digital currencies along with various other digital payment rails, offer methods to make that a reality. However, Nigeria's case study thus far shows the difficulty of doing so if the public is not in alignment with the attempt to do so. As of this writing, over a year and a half after the introduction of the eNaira, far more Nigerians use cryptocurrencies than use the eNaira, even though Nigeria has long since severed its banking system from cryptocurrency exchanges. Nigerians, being unable to send money from a bank to a cryptocurrency exchange, instead trade peer-to-peer to get access to the cryptocurrencies or other assets that they want.

That doesn't stop more central banks from entering the CBDC market. In early 2023, Russian pranksters posed as Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelensky and managed to convince Jerome Powell and Christine Lagarde to separately take video calls with them --- which they then recorded and released online.[^399] In the call with Lagarde, who currently runs the European Central Bank, they asked her about upcoming plans for central bank digital currency, and what her response is to the idea that people don't like to be controlled. She responded with the following:

> Now we have in Europe this threshold: above 1,000 euros you cannot pay cash. If you do, you're on the gray market. So, you take your risk. You get caught: you are fined or you go in jail. You know, the digital euro is going to have a limited amount of control. There will be control, you're right, you're completely right. We are considering whether for very small amounts, you know, anything that is around 300 \[or\] 400 euros, we could have a mechanism where there is zero control. But that could be dangerous. The terrorist attacks on France ten years ago were entirely financed by those very small anonymous credit cards that you can recharge in total anonymity.[^400]

First, Lagarde mentioned France's existing limit for cash payments, which is part of their effort to reduce cash usage but is somewhat hard to enforce. Several countries have laws limiting the amounts of cash that businesses can accept, and France has one of the lowest limits. Second, Lagarde referred to a terrorist attack from nearly a decade ago as a potential reason to disallow citizens from having any uncontrolled anonymous transactions whatsoever. Over the past fifty years, less than 0.001% of the French population has been killed in terrorist attacks, and yet it's her go-to reason for the importance of top-down centralized surveillance and control of all transactions in the country.

Throughout this book, I continually return to the question of "who controls the ledger?" when examining various financial systems and technologies.

It's clear that money is moving into an increasingly digital form over time. The creation of Bitcoin ushered in a new era, and its aim was to decentralize money and give control of the ledger back to the users. On the other hand, fiat currency systems have adopted aspects of this technology and are being digitized as well, in the form of central bank digital currencies. In contrast to Bitcoin, CBDCs empower the controllers of the ledger at the expense of the users, and therefore give central banks and state agencies the ability to control their ledger with even finer precision than they historically have been able to do. The technology of central bank digital currencies potentially allows central banks to phase out physical cash, which represents the last vestiges of private and censorship-resistant transactions within existing fiat currency systems.

If we envision an ideal form of money, we envision very different things depending on who we are and what we aim to do. From the perspective of a central bank or government agency, the ideal money is one that they have absolute control over. They want it to gradually devalue over time, be easily surveilled and programmable by the issuer, and able to be frozen by the issuer at will for reasons that they consider to be justified. Central bank digital currencies are being and will continue to be advertised as systems that make financial services more accessible to people and that give enhanced tools to law enforcement personnel to catch criminal activity. However, the very technology that enables those features also gives governments and corporations an enhanced ability to crush public dissent and control the lives of their citizens, which is relevant in a world where over half of the global population lives under authoritarian or semi-authoritarian regimes and where there are 160 different currency monopolies. From the perspective of an individual user, the ideal money is one that is resistant to debasement, that can't be easily seized or controlled by third parties, that offers enhancements to transactional privacy, and that is globally portable and globally accepted.

This era represents a fork in the road. One direction provides a stepwise upgrade to those who wish to continue the multi-century trend of further and further centralization of the financial system. The other direction reverses that trend, fractures the existing forces of centralization, and gives more financial autonomy back to individual users who wish to take it. Part 6, the final part in this book, explores the ethics of these two different directions.


## Footnotes

[^391]: Agustín Carstens, "Cross-Border Payments---A Vision for the Future," (24:12--25:06).

[^392]: Bank for International Settlements, "Project mBridge: Connecting Economies Through CBDC."

[^393]: Ruchir Agarwal and Signe Krogstrup, "Cashing In: How to Make Negative Interest Rates Work."

[^394]: Gauti Eggertsson et al., "Negative Nominal Interest Rates and the Bank Lending Channel," 6.

[^395]: The main treatment and overview of this topic is Kenneth Rogoff, *The Curse of Cash*.

[^396]: James Areddy, "China Creates Its Own Digital Currency, a First for Major Economy," *Wall Street Journal*, April 5, 2021.

[^397]: Alys Key, "Nigeria Limits Cash Withdrawals to \$45 per Day in CBDC, Digital Banking Push," *Yahoo! Finance*, December 7, 2022.

[^398]: Emele Onu and Anthony Osae-Brown, "Nigeria Caps ATM Cash Withdrawals at \$45 Daily to Push Digital Payments," *Bloomberg*. December 6, 2022.

[^399]: Forkast.News, "ECB's Lagarde gets pranked, reveals digital euro will have 'limited' control," *Yahoo! Finance*, April 7, 2023.

[^400]: For *Rumble* video, see Real Truth Real News, "Vovan and Lexus' Pretend to Be Zelensky", *Rumble*, April 2023, (16:34--17:25).

