# Chapter 28: **The Degradation of Privacy**

As this book has already illustrated, the right to privacy is increasingly being challenged in the digital age.

Privacy used to be expensive to violate. Prior to the widespread usage of the internet, smartphones, surveillance cameras, and other technologies, the only way to violate someone's privacy was to physically spy on them, search their person, or search their property. And because of this, the person who had their privacy violated had a good chance of knowing that it was violated.

In the digital age, it's increasingly easy and inexpensive for governments, corporations, or individuals to violate someone's privacy, and without that person knowing. For governments and corporations, a combination of public and private information on billions of people can be harvested automatically on all the major financial and communication platforms. That data, once collected, can be organized by various Big Data techniques including machine learning, and algorithmically monitored or made easily searchable to users of the database. Centralized treasure troves of this data are frequently hacked and made available on the dark web as well.

The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, as part of the Bill of Rights that was ratified in 1791, provides protection against unreasonable searches and seizures:

> The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.[^402]

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, put forth by the United Nations in 1948, also lists privacy as a human right in Article 12:

> No one shall be subjected to arbitrary interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to attacks upon his honour and reputation. Everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.[^403]

In practice, these rights are regularly ignored in the United States and many other countries around the world.

Humans have an instinct to not want to be watched. We close our curtains at night. We are bothered if a stranger looks at us for too long in public. Our restrooms have doors on them; our voting booths have curtains on them. We are rightly concerned about our own cameras or microphones being hacked, allowing someone to watch us or listen to us when we are unaware.

This extends into the natural desire for privacy of our possessions and information as well. It's not necessarily that we don't want *anyone* to know about these things; it's that we want only people who have a need to know, to know. We don't necessarily want to tell a stranger what our salary is, what medications we take, or what our sexual lives are like. But of course, we may reveal our salary in a job interview, we will freely talk about our medical issues and medications with our doctor, and we share our sexual lives with our partners.

If our privacy needs to be violated by legitimate authorities, then as both the Bill of Rights and the Declaration of Human Rights suggest, it shouldn't be arbitrary or universal, but rather should be with some degree of probable cause, for a specific reason, and within the bounds of the rule of law.

Privacy is important in a free society but is even more critical in an unfree society. In unfree countries, someone who has the "wrong" political opinions, sexual life, or religious affiliation may face persecution by the government or other members of society even if what they are saying, what they are doing, or what they believe causes no direct harm to others. There will always be people who believe they know what the best way to live is, and that they somehow have the right to force others to live that way.

Unfortunately, as surveillance technology becomes more powerful over time, people can't realistically ask their governments or corporations for privacy. The answer will be "no" and the reasons for that keep changing over time. In the United States, during the 1970s and 1980s the reason for why privacy had to be systemically violated was the war on drugs. In the 2000s the reason shifted toward the war on terror. In the 2020s the reason shifted toward the war on trafficking and alignment with enemy nation states. There will always be a reason presented as to why nobody can have privacy, to ensure that a small percentage of people don't abuse it for criminal purposes.

Instead, if people want privacy, they must build powerful counter-technologies that allow people to retain some of their own privacy and force the laws and activities to reshape themselves around that new technological reality. Just like people build physical walls around their persons and their physical possessions, which require expending energy and legal effort to bypass, they must build digital walls around their digital data for the same purpose.

**Transactional Privacy**

The right to privacy naturally includes transactional privacy. If a government, corporation, or individual acquires a full history of your transactions, then they learn pretty much all they could possibly want to know about you. And if someone can track your transactions in real time, then by extension they can generally track your physical location in real time.

When we look back at the types of money described in this book, several of them offered their users decent levels of transactional privacy, and that has generally been the norm for thousands of years. Bearer asset money in the form of precious metal coins and physical banknotes are quite naturally private. They were (and for banknotes still are) used for physical exchange between parties in a transaction, with no third party or observer able to keep track of the changes in the ledger. The "state of the ledger" of these bearer assets is maintained by possession, and no single entity (including the issuer, in the case of banknotes) can observe the full ongoing state of the ledger.

However, with the rise of telecommunication systems and the regular use of bank deposits for savings, the default state of financial privacy decreased substantially. The administrator of a bank ledger can easily keep track of how much money you have, where you are sending it to, and where you are receiving it from. And as a natural consequence of this, governments can ask the banks to hand over that data on a regular basis. Plus, a monetary policy that promotes persistent inflation encourages people to seek out interest to keep up with that inflation, which means it inherently disincentives the holding of physical cash and incentivizes the use of fractionally reserved and highly surveilled bank deposits.

The 1970 Bank Secrecy Act, enacted into law by the U.S. government and still in effect, compels banks to file reports with the government if a customer's daily transactions exceed \$10,000.

When this law was enacted in 1970, the median American annual income was less than \$10,000. Therefore, the law only covered rather large sums of money moving within a day --- worth well over \$80,000 in today's weaker dollars. However, there was no inflation adjustment embedded into the law. As the value of the dollar eroded over time, banks effectively had to file reports regarding smaller and smaller levels of transactions, since \$10,000 worth of transactions occurring in a day became more and more commonplace. Every year, the government effectively lowered the threshold regarding its financial surveillance, simply through inflation, without passing further legislation.

Over the next fifty years, if the rate of inflation averages the same amount it has over the past fifty years, then the reporting threshold will shrink by another 8x or so in terms of purchasing power. When the law was enacted, the government granted itself the ability to keep tabs on house-sized transactions. Over time, inflation enhanced the law so that they can keep track of transactions the size of used cars. If this keeps up, it will enable them to keep track of transactions the size of lawnmowers or bicycles.

Similar reporting requirements exist in other countries as well. And as described in later sections of this chapter, intelligence agencies can and do investigate all manner of information even below these types of thresholds, with or without probable cause. And realistically, small transactions are already monitored at a very granular scale by the banks themselves.

Governments also do their best to apply these restrictions to other ledgers as well. Starting on the first day of January 2020, for example, Germany's government lowered the threshold on how much physical precious metals may be purchased by an individual without doing an identity check from 10,000 euros to only 2,000 euros worth of gold --- ostensibly to combat money laundering. Germans can buy all sorts of things for over 2,000 euros without showing identification, but not gold. In late 2019, leading up to this change, there were long lines of people queuing at bullion shops to purchase precious metals with privacy before the tighter identification thresholds went into effect.

Similarly, during the past decade France banned cash transactions over 1,000 euros. The stated goal was to combat terrorist financing and money laundering. Several other countries have similar restrictions on cash.

**The 1980s Pager Saga**

Criminals naturally make use of emerging technologies when available to them. In the 1980s for example, drug dealers began making extensive use of pagers to evade law enforcement. Pagers, however, were of course also used legitimately by doctors, lawyers, journalists, delivery workers, and others. A 1988 *Washington Post* article called "Message is Out on Beepers" opened with the following description:

> When a drug dealer is in trouble, he sometimes dials 911. But he isn\'t trying to reach the police.
>
> Instead, this message is sent to a drug courier wearing a beeper that displays messages dialed from a phone: 911 means the police are closing in.
>
> Although paging devices, or beepers, have grown in popularity throughout the labor force --- doctors, delivery people and journalists often use them --- they also have become a staple in the drug business, posing fresh problems for law enforcement and threatening to tarnish the image of a booming high-tech industry.[^404]

The article went on to describe various techniques that were used to try to filter out illicit use of pagers. Credit checks were extensively used on purchasers of pagers, even when paying in cash, to try to reduce them getting into the hands of criminals. It also described how the American Civil Liberties Union pushed back on the potential for overreach by authorities in their attempt to determine who can access pagers and who cannot.

It seems quaint today, given how far technology has progressed since then, but this is an example of how any technology can be used for good or ill, especially when it is new. Public debates then begin to occur regarding how access to the technology may be restricted to maintain its benefits while reducing the instances of it falling into the wrong hands. The outcome, time and time again, is that it's very hard to globally and permanently suppress the proliferation of new technology, and most powerful technologies can be used for both good and evil.

Today, as most of us have mobile access to the internet, the idea of limiting pager use seems silly. It's such a low level of technology compared to what is accessible for 90% of the world today.

**Surveillance Capitalism**

A big trend throughout the 2000s and 2010s decades involved monetizing user data. Various companies would offer "free" services to users, but the real cost for that service was that they would collect and then either directly use or sell user data. The primary purpose of this business model is to target ads toward a person based on their online activity, which is very lucrative. A user gained various services, but the hidden cost was the loss of most of their privacy to large corporations.

Alphabet's data collection capabilities are particularly noteworthy. With their main Google website, by far the most-used search engine in the world, they can track your search history. With Chrome, the most-used browser in the world, they can track where you go online. If you upload a document to their cloud, they can scan it and determine if it violates their terms of service. If you use Gmail, they can scan your email history and real-time communications. If you have an Android-based phone, especially if you don't have certain privacy settings enabled, they can track your location, your app usage, and other fine details. Imagine the amount of information that people have given to one corporation --- the ability to read their emails, documents, search history, what websites they go to, their app usage, and perhaps their real-time physical location.[^405]

Nearly a decade ago when all of this was newer, I remember when I happened to be looking at my neighborhood on Google Maps and was surprised to see a note on a building saying that I had a dentist appointment there next week. I thought for a moment and realized that Google's software must have read (and understood) my dentist's email confirmation and then shared that information across their platforms.

In addition to monetizing data of free users, many products use data to try to be more convenient. Alexa and Siri, for example, listen to your voice to help you. But by extension, it means you've literally wiretapped your home for Amazon and Apple, which are among the largest corporations in the world. People trust their security systems as well. They install various outward-facing cameras, and often have cameras on their inside keypad. This information generally goes into a cloud service and runs through servers maintained by the largest corporations in the world.

If you merely walk down the street, chances are you are appearing on multiple cameras, with the data being uploaded to the cloud in real time. In a residential area, it will consist of a lot of doorbell cameras and other outward-facing cameras. In an urban area, it will also consist of various crime-prevention surveillance systems.

**Countless Data Breaches**

Unfortunately, data breaches occur all the time these days, against governments, corporations, and individuals. Ultimately, most of this ends up affecting individuals. People who trust government and corporate servers to safely store their data are very likely to be let down.

In 2013, three billion Yahoo email accounts were exposed to a data breach, and it went unknown to most people for years. In addition to the hackers being able to access the email accounts of people, other forms of information including names, dates of birth, phone numbers, security questions, and passwords of many accounts were leaked.

In 2014, eBay was breached, resulting in the public dissemination of information on 145 million people. The breached information included names, email addresses, physical addresses, phone numbers, and dates of birth.

In 2015, the U.S. Office of Personal Management experienced one of the biggest data breaches in U.S. federal government history. Over 22 million individuals, most of whom were government employees, contractors, or who had applied to those types of jobs, had personally sensitive information leaked including social security numbers, names, dates and places of birth, salary histories, health insurance information, and home addresses. For millions of them, this went further into background checks for security clearances, including full psychological profiles, information on family members and friends, and fingerprints.

In 2016, the adult social networking site, Adult Friend Finder, experienced a data breach involving 412 million accounts across several different databases (since they owned several other adult content sites as well). This data included deleted accounts and stretched back through two decades of account history. It included names, emails, and passwords, as well as the simple fact that the leaked people had accounts at these types of adult sites.

In 2017, one of the three main U.S. credit bureaus, Equifax, experienced a data breach that affected 148 million Americans plus several million Britons. The information included names, social security numbers, physical addresses, and in some cases driver's license numbers. Most users didn't opt in or otherwise use Equifax as a service; Equifax and other credit bureaus collect information on people whether they want them to or not. Most people can't even name the three credit bureaus (Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion) and yet those organizations maintain massive personal and financial databases on people anyway. Our financial system with ever-devaluing currency revolves almost entirely around access to credit, and these oligopolistic entities sit near the heart of the system gathering as much information as possible for that system to function.

In 2018, India's Aadhaar database was breached. This is one of the largest identification databases in the world, with information on more than one billion individuals. The information included names, photos, physical addresses, phone numbers, email addresses, iris scans, fingerprints, and even certain bank account information.

Also in 2018, the database of Marriott and their broad range of hotel brands was breached. Marriott is the largest hotel corporation in the world, and they own many hotel chains that don't even carry the Marriott name. The information for millions of people included names, physical addresses, phone numbers, email addresses, passport numbers, dates of birth, reservation history, and credit card information.

In 2019, Capital One was breached by a former Amazon employee, who leaked the information online. With data related to customer accounts and credit card applications stretching back to 2005, approximately 100 million people had their data leaked, including names, physical addresses, email addresses, credit scores, account balances, and social security numbers.

In 2021, a Brazilian database was breached, resulting in a leak of personal information for virtually everyone in Brazil (well over 200 million people). The information included names, tax identification numbers, physical addresses, email addresses, phone numbers, credit scores, facial images, salary information, and more.

These data breaches are just the tip of the iceberg, and just happen to be some of the more notable ones. Most large corporations, ranging from Home Depot, to Microsoft, to J.P. Morgan Chase, to Meta Platforms, and others have experienced significant data breaches regarding user data at some point in their history. Most readers of this book have likely been the victim of numerous data breaches over the past decade, including several that they aren't even aware of.

**The Snowden Revelation**

In 2013, a now well-known U.S. National Security Agency contractor named Edward Snowden leaked information to journalists that revealed that the NSA's surveillance capabilities extended far beyond what was previously known to the public. Specifically, the NSA was revealed to be able to directly tap into the systems of major telecommunication providers and large corporate software platforms to harvest information. In one of the original reports, the *Guardian* revealed:

> A chart prepared by the NSA, contained within the top-secret document obtained by the Guardian, underscores the breadth of the data it is able to obtain: email, video and voice chat, videos, photos, voice-over-IP (Skype, for example) chats, file transfers, social networking details, and more.
>
> The document is recent, dating to April 2013. Such a leak is extremely rare in the history of the NSA, which prides itself on maintaining a high level of secrecy.
>
> The Prism program allows the NSA, the world\'s largest surveillance organisation, to obtain targeted communications without having to request them from the service providers and without having to obtain individual court orders.
>
> With this program, the NSA is able to reach directly into the servers of the participating companies and obtain both stored communications as well as perform real-time collection on targeted users.[^406]

The secretive set of programs had certain theoretical legal limitations (e.g., they were "supposed" to only target foreign individuals), but there was essentially no significant protection of American users. Legal decisions for the program were made in secret courts and were not previously known to the public, which prior to the leak gave the public virtually no way to push back or question the nature of these programs. A decade later here in 2023, these types of programs continue to exist in myriad forms in the United States and around the world.

**The Proliferation of Client-Side Surveillance**

In 2016, a sophisticated suite of mobile phone spyware called Pegasus was discovered. Ahmed Mansoor, an Emirati human rights activist was sent a text message about secrets regarding torture in UAE prisons. Rather than clicking on the link, he sent it for analysis to the University of Toronto's Citizen Lab, and they determined that if he had clicked the link, it would have infected his phone with this spyware.[^407]

Mansoor had at the time been a public human rights activist for many years, critical of UAE heads of state. He had faced numerous attempts to silence him including arrest. Later in 2017, he was indeed arrested again for his ongoing peaceful protests for supposedly spreading false information, harming the reputation of the UAE heads of state, and inciting strife. For this activism, he was sentenced to a decade in prison. During this time, he has gone on numerous hunger strikes to protest years of solitary confinement, lack of medical support, and poor physical treatment.[^408]

Pegasus is spyware that can be covertly installed on phones and used to spy on a target. Rather than making use of one exploit, it makes use of many different exploits, and can affect different phones in different ways. It is capable of one-click downloads (e.g., by tricking someone to click on a single malicious link) or even zero-click downloads in some cases, where the target doesn't even have to click something malicious for the software to be remotely downloaded and installed onto their phone. Once installed, the spyware can look through contacts, call logs, text messages, photos, browsing history, location data, and various apps including email and various messengers. It is also capable of tapping into the phone's microphone and camera without the user knowing.

The spyware was developed by an Israeli cyber-intelligence firm called NSO Group with the supposed use-case of monitoring terrorists and other criminals. However, it has been widely and repeatedly documented by global media for its extensive use by authoritarian governments on journalists and human rights activists.

For example, in 2021, Citizen Lab reported that nine Bahraini activists had been successfully exploited by Pegasus software, including three members of the Bahrain Center for Human Rights and two exiled dissidents.[^409]

Freedom House, a nonprofit organization that advocates for democracy around the world, ranks Bahrain near the bottom of their country list in terms of freedom rankings. Their summary regarding the state of human rights in Bahrain is as follows:

> Bahrain's Sunni-led monarchy dominates state institutions, and elections for the lower house of parliament are neither competitive nor inclusive. Since violently crushing a popular prodemocracy protest movement in 2011, the authorities have systematically eliminated a broad range of political rights and civil liberties, dismantled the political opposition, and cracked down on persistent dissent concentrated among the Shiite population.[^410]

In 2022, Citizen Lab reported that over thirty Thai activists, lawyers, and academics, many of whom were involved in pro-democracy movements, had their phones infected by Pegasus.[^411]

Freedom House ranks Thailand relatively low on its freedom rankings, and summarizes:

> Following five years of military dictatorship, Thailand transitioned to a military-dominated, semielected government in 2019. The combination of democratic deterioration and frustrations over the role of the monarchy in Thailand's governance has since triggered massive demonstrations. In response, the regime continues to employ authoritarian tactics, including arbitrary arrests, intimidation, lèse-majesté charges, and harassment of activists. Press freedom is constrained, due process is not guaranteed, and there is impunity for crimes committed against activists.[^412]

Citizen Lab also reported that Pegasus was extensively used against El Salvadorian journalists, including many who had been critical of the country\'s presidential administration.[^413]

In 2021, journalist investigations found evidence of widespread usage of Pegasus by Hungary's government on its domestic opposition. They also reported that Hungary had fallen from 23rd to 92nd in the World Press Freedom Index during the period of 2010 (when Viktor Orbán became prime minister) through 2021.[^414]

Pegasus has also been found on the phones of activists in Uganda, Rwanda, Panama, Morocco, and people in dozens of other countries that are too exhaustive to list here. It is frequently deployed against political opposition, pro-democracy advocates, human rights advocates, and as a foreign espionage tool against politicians of other countries. While it has been deployed against actual criminals as well, these examples show how surveillance and control technologies that are ostensibly meant for use against dangerous individuals or groups can easily be turned toward peaceful individuals or groups by state actors that find such opposition or activism to be inconvenient.

Concerningly, this spyware has also been deployed by governments in relatively free countries as well. A joint investigation by the *Guardian* and *El País* in 2020 found extensive use of Pegasus by Spanish intelligence on Catalonian separatists, including the active president of the Catalonian regional parliament at the time.[^415]

Freedom House assigns quite high rankings to Spain:

> Spain's parliamentary system features competitive multiparty elections and peaceful transfers of power between rival parties. The rule of law prevails, and civil liberties are generally respected. Although political corruption remains a concern, high-ranking politicians and other powerful figures have been successfully prosecuted. Restrictive legislation adopted or enforced in recent years poses a threat to otherwise robust freedoms of expression and assembly. A persistent separatist movement in Catalonia represents the leading challenge to the country's constitutional system and territorial integrity.[^416]

In late 2021, it was reported across major media outlets that Pegasus had been used by the Polish government, under the leadership of the Law and Justice Party, against their political opponents.[^417]

Freedom House assigns moderately high rankings to Poland, and summarizes:

> Poland's democratic institutions took root at the start of its transition from communist rule in 1989. Rapid economic growth and other societal changes have benefited some segments of the population more than others, contributing to a deep divide between liberal, pro-European parties and those purporting to defend national interests and "traditional" Polish Catholic values. Since taking power in 2015, a coalition led by the populist, socially conservative Law and Justice (PiS) party has exerted significant political influence over state institutions and damaged Poland's democratic progress. Recent years have seen an increase in nationalist and discriminatory rhetoric.[^418]

A 2021 Associated Press report titled "Probe: Journalists, Activists Among Firm's Spyware Targets" summarized the scale of Pegasus use:

> An investigation by a global media consortium based on leaked targeting data provides further evidence that military-grade malware from Israel-based NSO Group, the world's most infamous hacker-for-hire outfit, is being used to spy on journalists, human rights activists and political dissidents.[^419]

The AP's report went on to describe the extent of surveillance that was found from a rather small sample of phone numbers:

> From a list of more than 50,000 cellphone numbers obtained by the Paris-based journalism nonprofit Forbidden Stories and the human rights group Amnesty International and shared with 16 news organizations, journalists were able to identify more than 1,000 individuals in 50 countries who were allegedly selected by NSO clients for potential surveillance.
>
> They include 189 journalists, more than 600 politicians and government officials, at least 65 business executives, 85 human rights activists and several heads of state, according to The Washington Post, a consortium member. The journalists work for organizations including The Associated Press, Reuters, CNN, The Wall Street Journal, Le Monde and The Financial Times.
>
> Amnesty also reported that its forensic researchers had determined that NSO Group's flagship Pegasus spyware was successfully installed on the phone of Post journalist Jamal Khashoggi's fiancee, Hatice Cengiz, just four days after he was killed in the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul in 2018. The company had previously been implicated in other spying on Khashoggi.[^420]

**China's Surveillance Exportation**

In 2013, China launched the Belt and Road Initiative, which is a global infrastructure development strategy that China is using to place their economy at the heart of a vast trade network.

In many ways, they are replicating some of the same neocolonialist monetary practices that the United States, the United Kingdom, France, and prior world powers have been doing throughout the developing world since the mid-20th century. China provides loans to developing countries and helps them build out their infrastructure, but at the cost of giving the Chinese government considerable political and economic influence over them.

In addition to being rather prolific in their infrastructure projects, Chinese companies are competitive producers of electronic systems and artificial intelligence, and this is a central feature of their Belt and Road Initiative. Domestically, China is well-known for having an extensive authoritarian surveillance and control apparatus, including facial recognition systems, various restrictions on movement via QR codes, an extensive social credit system, and the capability of performing automatic bank account freezes. However, as part of the Belt and Road initiative, China has also become the world\'s largest exporter of surveillance equipment and systems, surpassing the United States in that regard.

This is concerning, considering that this is how Freedom House summarized China's state of freedom in 2023:

> China's authoritarian regime has become increasingly repressive in recent years. The ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP) continues to tighten control over all aspects of life and governance, including the state bureaucracy, the media, online speech, religious practice, universities, businesses, and civil society associations. The CCP leader and state president, Xi Jinping, secured a third term as party leader in October 2022, further consolidating personal power to a degree not seen in China for decades. Following a multiyear crackdown on political dissent, independent nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and human rights defenders, China's civil society has been largely decimated.[^421]

In 2019, Steven Feldstein of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace published a paper titled "The Global Expansion of AI Surveillance." Among many other points, the report described the world\'s increasing usage of AI-powered surveillance technology, led by Chinese development:

> AI surveillance technology is spreading at a faster rate to a wider range of countries than experts have commonly understood. At least seventy-five out of 176 countries globally are actively using AI technologies for surveillance purposes. This includes: smart city/safe city platforms (fifty-six countries), facial recognition systems (sixty-four countries), and smart policing (fifty-two countries).
>
> China is a major driver of AI surveillance worldwide. Technology linked to Chinese companies --- particularly Huawei, Hikvision, Dahua, and ZTE --- supply AI surveillance technology in sixty-three countries, thirty-six of which have signed onto China's Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). Huawei alone is responsible for providing AI surveillance technology to at least fifty countries worldwide.[^422]

The numbers are likely much larger now as of this writing, given how quickly this technology has been improving. The paper described that the technology is extensively used by both democratic and authoritarian countries, but that authoritarian countries tend to abuse the usage of the data more. It also described how China finances or subsidizes the use of the equipment for many countries that would otherwise have difficulty affording it. As the paper put it:

> Chinese product pitches are often accompanied by soft loans to encourage governments to purchase their equipment. These tactics are particularly relevant in countries like Kenya, Laos, Mongolia, Uganda, and Uzbekistan --- which otherwise might not access this technology. This raises troubling questions about the extent to which the Chinese government is subsidizing the purchase of advanced repressive technology.[^423]

In 2022, a report by Bulelani Jili of the Atlantic Council titled "China's Surveillance Ecosystem & the Global Spread of its Tools" explored the topic in similar detail. As the report\'s executive summary described:

> This paper seeks to offer insights into how China's domestic surveillance market and cyber capability ecosystem operate, especially given the limited number of systematic studies that have analyzed its industry objectives. For the Chinese government, investment in surveillance technologies advances both its ambitions of becoming a global technology leader as well as its means of domestic social control. These developments also foster further collaboration between state security actors and private tech firms. Accordingly, the tech firms that support state cyber capabilities range from small cyber research startups to leading global tech enterprises. The state promotes surveillance technology and practices abroad through diplomatic exchanges, law enforcement cooperation, and training programs. These efforts encourage the dissemination of surveillance devices, but also support the government's goals concerning international norm-making in multilateral and regional institutions.
>
> The proliferation of Chinese surveillance technology and cyber tools and the associated linkages between both state and private Chinese entities with those in other states, especially in the Global South, is a valuable component of Chinese state efforts to expand and strengthen their political and economic influence worldwide. Although individual governments purchasing Chinese digital tools have their local ambitions in mind, Beijing's export and promotion of domestic surveillance technologies shape the adoption of these tools in the Global South. As such, investigating how Chinese actors leverage demand factors for their own aims, does not undercut the ability of other countries to detect and determine outcomes. Rather it demonstrates an interplay between*\
>*Chinese state strategy and local political environments.[^424]

This technology tends to spread very efficiently because countries don't have to re-create the technology on their own; a handful of major technology exporters and trading partners including China, the United States, and a few others can supply all of them. It is "surveillance as a service."

**The Surveillance and Control Mindset**

Extensive government surveillance, especially when used in automatic and ubiquitous ways rather than targeted ways based on probable cause, is implicitly based on the premise that everyone must give up most or all their privacy to central authorities to ensure that nothing bad happens. Because people are generally not very quantitative in nature, and instead tend to be more responsive to emotional arguments, most people go along with such intrusions.

For example, over the past several decades less than 0.05% of global deaths have been from terrorism.[^425] In most countries outside of the Middle East and Africa, the percentage is lower than 0.01%. That means fewer than one in ten thousand people die from terrorism in most countries. And yet, countless laws are shaped around granting governments additional powers to prevent terrorism.

The 2001 Patriot Act was an example of legislation that gave more power for government surveillance and control techniques to prevent terrorism, and it was received well at the time because it came shortly after the infamous 9/11 terrorist attacks. With this type of legislation, people hand over a part of their privacy, indefinitely, during the peak of an emotional response to a recent event. Decade after decade, event after event, this centralizing tendency chips away at individual rights to privacy and begins to shape culture to align with the idea that people who want privacy must be up to something bad.

In a free and open society, there is generally debate and pushback around priorities, and an arms race between criminals and law enforcement. Naturally, we want terrorists, human traffickers, violent street criminals, mob members, murderers, thieves, fraudsters, and other dangerous individuals to be caught and prosecuted, and therefore most people happily provide resources to law enforcement to achieve those ends. However, the procedures and technologies used by law enforcement to catch dangerous criminals can also be used by governments to suppress speech, surveil human rights activists and pro-democracy activists and political opponents, and maintain authoritarian control over their subjects --- which is why it's important to have limitations on their powers. As previously described, military-grade spyware that is ostensibly meant for use against terrorists and dangerous criminals is also heavily used against human rights activists, pro-democracy activists, and political opposition by authoritarian (and even non-authoritarian) governments.

Whenever given the opportunity, governments around the world frequently grant themselves crisis powers, and then extend some, or all, of those powers indefinitely. Only in countries with a deep culture of respecting individual liberty, democracy, and government accountability, has there generally been enough societal pushback to elect leaders that dismantle prior powers and actively decrease government overreach.

**Putting it All Together**

In the modern era, people should assume that virtually all information about them is collected into corporate databases, that their government can access the databases, and that the databases are vulnerable to external breaches by non-state or foreign-state hackers or inside leakers. It is most likely the case that your sensitive personal data has been leaked multiple times on the dark web, and that your personal data is easily accessible to intelligence analysts as part of their surveillance apparatus.

With additional time and financing, as well as advancements in processing power and software development, surveillance technology deployed by governments and corporations is likely to become even more commonplace, and with ever-greater abilities to gather and organize data from digital and physical environments. Even now, journalists, peaceful activists, and anyone considered a nuisance by their government, should be cautious by assuming that their phone and computer have already been infiltrated by military-grade spyware such as Pegasus.

In addition, as a prior chapter on central bank digital currencies discussed, governments can give themselves increasing levels of programmability for their national currencies. With CBDCs they could tailor different monetary policies for different groups, automatically freeze accounts associated with certain people, and could program someone's money to shut off for certain categories or in certain geographies.

With or without CBDCs specifically, the combination of widespread surveillance hardware, machine learning systems connected to massive amounts of collected data, and controllable bank accounts and currency, means that protestors in a crowd can automatically have their faces recognized and their financial accounts frozen if authorities want to, for example.

When everything is put together, it can lead to a rather Orwellian outcome. What may sound like a dystopian science fiction movie could become an increasing reality in many jurisdictions, especially jurisdictions of the more authoritarian variety. In a handful of jurisdictions such as China, there are already elements of this in place currently. Imagine getting automated messages like these:

> "Due to your concerning online activity over the past month, your social credit score has dropped below the minimally acceptable threshold. Until further notice, your transactional ability has been reduced to within five miles of your residence, and only for essential goods and services."
>
> "Your monthly C02 quota has been reached. Until the end of the month, your transactional ability to purchase meat, airplane tickets, or other carbon-intensive goods and services will be declined. Here is a website with helpful guidance on how to reduce your carbon footprint so that you may ration it more appropriately next month."
>
> "Due to recent disruptive protests in your region, all bank accounts and payment methods of those who have been surveilled or suspected to be involved will be suspended for the next 72 hours. Please return to your home and await further instructions."
>
> "Our enemies are attacking our currency. It is in all citizens' interest to support the currency and national banking system. Therefore, all purchases of foreign currency, precious metals, cryptocurrencies, and similar assets will be automatically blocked until further notice."

These quotes may seem far-fetched to readers in liberal democracies, but the loss of privacy in the digital age combined with the gradual rise of autocracies globally and the fine-tuned programmability of central bank digital currencies and bank accounts generally, is a concerning development that is hard to overstate. Whether one is on the right or left on the political spectrum, one merely must imagine one of their least favorite politicians gaining control over these types of systems. What is first applied to the fringes can easily be applied to the masses. Even jurisdictions with the strongest rules of law and property rights may buckle under these pressures (and indeed already have done so to varying degrees) while jurisdictions with the weakest rules of law and property rights can be entirely captured.


## Footnotes

[^402]: National Archives, "The Bill of Rights."

[^403]: United Nations, "Universal Declaration of Human Rights."

[^404]: Jonathan Moses, "Message Is Out On Beepers," *The Washington Post*, July 11, 1988.

[^405]: Shoshana Zuboff, *The Age of Surveillance Capitalism*.

[^406]: Glenn Greenwald and Ewen MacAskill, "NSA Prism Program Taps in to User Data of Apple, Google and Others," *Guardian*, June 7, 2013.

[^407]: Dave Lee, "Who are the Hackers who Cracked the iPhone?" *BBC News*, August 26, 2016.

[^408]: Americans for Democracy & Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB), "UAE: It's Time to Release Human Rights Defender Ahmed Mansoor," *IFEX.org*, April 28, 2023.

[^409]: Bill Marczak et al., "From Pearl to Pegasus: Bahraini Government Hacks Activists with NSO Group Zero-Click iPhone Exploits."

[^410]: Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2023: Bahrain."

[^411]: John Scott-Railton et al., "GeckoSpy: Pegasus Spyware Used Against Thailand's Pro-Democracy Movement."

[^412]: Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2023: Thailand."

[^413]: John Scott-Railton et al., "Extensive Hacking of Media & Civil Society in El Salvador with Pegasus Spyware."

[^414]: Shaun Walker, "Viktor Orbán Using NSO Spyware in Assault on Media, Data Suggests," *Guardian*, July 18, 2021.

[^415]: Sam Jones, "Use of Pegasus Spyware on Spain's Politicians Causing 'Crisis of Democracy'," *Guardian*, May 15, 2022.

[^416]: Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2022: Spain."

[^417]: Frank Bajak and Vanessa Gerad, "AP Exclusive: Polish Opposition Duo Hacked with NSO spyware," *AP News*, December 21, 2021.

[^418]: Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2023: Poland."

[^419]: Frank Bajak, "Probe: Journalists, Activists Among Firm's Spyware Targets," *AP News*, July 19, 2021.

[^420]: Baja, "Probe."

[^421]: Freedom House, "Freedom in the World 2023: China."

[^422]: Steven Feldstein, "The Global Expansion of AI Surveillance," 1.

[^423]: Feldstein, "Global Expansion," 2.

[^424]: Bulelani Jili, "China's Surveillance Ecosystem & The Global Spread of its Tools," 1.

[^425]: Hannah Ritchie et al., "Terrorism."

