# Chapter 29: **Asymmetric Defense**

The prior chapter discussed the risks associated with the reduction or elimination of social and financial privacy. Corporations and governments alike can collect user data into massive databases, which can be abused by them and are also ripe for hacking. The combination of automated data collection, machine learning, and government control of the financial system is very centralizing in terms of power structures and can allow governments to deploy various social control techniques on their populations.

This chapter discusses some of the defenses or pushbacks on that type of intrusion, mainly in the form of encryption.

Some technologies are inherently centralizing, while others are inherently decentralizing. An example of a decentralizing technology was the printing press. It was a necessary ingredient for the Protestant Reformation, the American Revolution, the French Revolution, and all sorts of major changes to society. It enabled large countries to shift their governance models from theocracy and monarchy toward democracy, since it enabled the inexpensive distribution of information and ideas over long distances.

Prior to the invention of the printing press, books had to be copied by hand. It was a labor-intensive (and therefore expensive) process. Written information was expensive, literacy rates were low, and therefore information was highly centralized. In terms of Christianity, people were not expected to have their own Bibles or interpret the contents for themselves; the church priests had the expensive Bibles and interpreted them for their churchgoers. After the invention of the printing press, it became much cheaper to reproduce books, pamphlets, and other writings. A person could more easily own or access a copy of the Bible, interpret it for themselves, and then mass-produce and distribute pamphlets articulating their views. Similarly, a person could more easily spread political pamphlets against rulers in charge of their society and organize the public around a set of new ideas or grievances. Or a person could write and distribute stories that inspire new ideas and shape the culture around them.[^426]

Encryption is a newer decentralizing force and an asymmetric defense because it is cheap to deploy but expensive to attack. The top encryption methods today cannot be broken even by the best supercomputers. No matter how many billions of dollars that governments and corporations use to try to break strong encryption, they can't do it. And as computers get stronger at breaking earlier encryption methods, new and more powerful encryption methods arise. A physical analogy for this is that encryption is like a bunker that can't be destroyed by any bomb currently in existence, no matter how powerful.

Instead, authorities must go around encryption. If people are sending encrypted messages to each other or transferring encrypted value to each other, and the government wants to stop or surveil that, it must be done by spyware on the device before it is encrypted, or by physical force on the person, and both of those are expensive to do on an individual level and able to be defended against in various ways. Encryption, therefore, is a method of making it expensive to violate someone's privacy in the digital age, like it used to be expensive to violate someone\'s privacy in the physical age.

**A Cypherpunk's Manifesto**

Dystopian science fiction books have been written and read for the better part of the past century. With the rise of the internet in the 1980s and 1990s, along with the digitization of money, many technology-focused people began to raise concerns regarding how this technology could be used in oppressive ways and how tools need to be developed to push back on those types of oppressive technologies. These individuals, often known as "cypherpunks," specifically advocate the usage of encryption as one of the main tools toward these ends.

Eric Hughes began his famous 1993 essay "A Cypherpunk\'s Manifesto" with a statement on how privacy differs from secrecy:

> Privacy is necessary for an open society in the electronic age. Privacy is not secrecy. A private matter is something one doesn\'t want the whole world to know, but a secret matter is something one doesn\'t want anybody to know. Privacy is the power to selectively reveal oneself to the world.[^427]

Further in the essay, he went on to elaborate about how private transactions are necessary, and how encrypted digital messages are critical:

> Since we desire privacy, we must ensure that each party to a transaction have knowledge only of that which is directly necessary for that transaction. Since any information can be spoken of, we must ensure that we reveal as little as possible. In most cases personal identity is not salient. When I purchase a magazine at a store and hand cash to the clerk, there is no need to know who I am. When I ask my electronic mail provider to send and receive messages, my provider need not know to whom I am speaking or what I am saying or what others are saying to me; my provider only need know how to get the message there and how much I owe them in fees. When my identity is revealed by the underlying mechanism of the transaction, I have no privacy. I cannot here selectively reveal myself; I must always reveal myself.
>
> Therefore, privacy in an open society requires anonymous transaction systems. Until now, cash has been the primary such system. An anonymous transaction system is not a secret transaction system. An anonymous system empowers individuals to reveal their identity when desired and only when desired; this is the essence of privacy.
>
> Privacy in an open society also requires cryptography. If I say something, I want it heard only by those for whom I intend it. If the content of my speech is available to the world, I have no privacy. To encrypt is to indicate the desire for privacy, and to encrypt with weak cryptography is to indicate not too much desire for privacy. Furthermore, to reveal one\'s identity with assurance when the default is anonymity requires the cryptographic signature.

In another segment of the essay, he correctly predicted that governments and corporations would not freely offer or advance the nature of privacy. If people want privacy, they need to build and deploy privacy-focused systems:

> We cannot expect governments, corporations, or other large, faceless organizations to grant us privacy out of their beneficence. It is to their advantage to speak of us, and we should expect that they will speak. To try to prevent their speech is to fight against the realities of information. Information does not just want to be free, it longs to be free. Information expands to fill the available storage space. Information is Rumor\'s younger, stronger cousin; Information is fleeter of foot, has more eyes, knows more, and understands less than Rumor.
>
> We must defend our own privacy if we expect to have any. We must come together and create systems which allow anonymous transactions to take place. People have been defending their own privacy for centuries with whispers, darkness, envelopes, closed doors, secret handshakes, and couriers. The technologies of the past did not allow for strong privacy, but electronic technologies do.
>
> We the Cypherpunks are dedicated to building anonymous systems. We are defending our privacy with cryptography, with anonymous mail forwarding systems, with digital signatures, and with electronic money.
>
> Cypherpunks write code. We know that someone has to write software to defend privacy, and since we can\'t get privacy unless we all do, we\'re going to write it. We publish our code so that our fellow Cypherpunks may practice and play with it. Our code is free for all to use, worldwide. We don\'t much care if you don\'t approve of the software we write. We know that software can\'t be destroyed and that a widely dispersed system can\'t be shut down.
>
> Cypherpunks deplore regulations on cryptography, for encryption is fundamentally a private act. The act of encryption, in fact, removes information from the public realm. Even laws against cryptography reach only so far as a nation\'s border and the arm of its violence. Cryptography will ineluctably spread over the whole globe, and with it the anonymous transactions systems that it makes possible.[^428]

The full essay was short and powerful and remains as relevant in the 2020s as it was in the 1990s. The open-source cryptographic creation of natively digital methods in 2008 to transfer value, fifteen years after the essay was written, in many ways revitalizes its contents and makes it worth reading and contemplating all over again.

One way to conceptualize this is to realize the importance of real-world institutions and then see why protocols serve the role of digital institutions. What allows some countries to persist as democracies and others to repeatedly degrade into autocracies, is the presence of independent institutions and checks on power, or the lack thereof.

In the United States, for example, we have a constitution at the base layer and then three branches of government with defined rules on how they interact with each other. It's not a perfect system, but it has done reasonably well and lasted for centuries through all types of different presidents and technological eras. If democracy relies on always having the right people in power, then it's destined to fail quickly. Institutions such as separate branches of government and founding documents that are held higher than any individual are what give the democratic system a degree of staying power. Strong and independent institutions make it so that for democracy to be lost, it requires a long period of chipping away at it rather than just one bad election.

Similarly, protocols that enhance the sharing of speech or value can be described as digital institutions. They provide a check on centralized power, or an information backbone that, while not invincible, provides a degree of persistence beyond what one powerful entity says things should be like at the time.

**The Legal Precedent for Code as Speech**

In 1991, a computer scientist and cryptographer named Phil Zimmermann created a program called "Pretty Good Privacy" or PGP for short. He published the open-source code, and it became the first widely available implementation of public-key cryptography that could be used by the public for ensuring that online messages were private between the sender and the receiver.

In 1993, the U.S. federal government began a criminal investigation against Zimmermann for allegedly violating the Arms Export Control Act. The government considered software encryption to be a form of munitions, and they considered Zimmermann's code being shared freely to be a form of munitions export.

In 1995, Zimmermann responded by publishing a book via MIT Press called *PGP Source Code and Internals*, which contained the full source code of his program. The reasoning was that although his code could supposedly be suppressed via the Arms Export Control Act as a munition, if he publishes it in a book then it is protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which grants freedom of speech and overrides lesser laws that would interfere with freedom of speech. Software code is merely a collection of words and numbers, and in this case, it was a defensive technology rather than one that could directly harm others.

Similar techniques were used for other types of encryption proponents. People would even put encryption-related code on t-shirts and wear them around, with warnings displayed on the shirts indicating that these shirts are classified as munitions and may not be exported. These sorts of protests 1) used some of the more foundational laws like the First Amendment in their favor, and 2) generally showed the absurdity of restricting information by taking such restrictions on information to their logical conclusions, since they imply the existence of so-called dangerous t-shirts. Some technologies, especially ones that consist entirely of software that can be written in a book or on a t-shirt, spread easily and are therefore inherently hard to suppress.[^429]

In 1996, the U.S. federal government dropped their charges against Zimmermann. They also went on to liberalize their munitions export restrictions around cryptography. End-to-end encryption subsequently played a very large role in enabling safe e-commerce from the late 1990s to the present day, as people share payment details online while trying to protect their payment details from bad actors. Sometimes, David does beat Goliath.

In the decades that followed, however, the U.S. federal government and other governments have repeatedly attempted takebacks against end-to-end encryption, to restrict its usage. In the U.S., various legislation has been put forth by members of the House or Senate that would restrict or ban the usage of end-to-end encryption, but they haven't passed. In the European Union, there have been proposals to mandate that corporations regularly scan every electronic device for illegal content, including so-called encrypted content.

One of the highest-profile incidences regarding this ongoing debate involved Apple, the largest U.S. company in this era. Starting in 2015 or earlier, law enforcement considered it unacceptable that, even with a warrant, they couldn't necessarily access certain password protected phones. This brought up questions such as:

"Should Apple or a similar company be allowed to build a phone that even they can't access?"

"Should all corporations be forced to build backdoors into their products for the government?"

"What about free open-source software? What if some random individuals create end-to-end encryption techniques that other individuals freely use? Can this be outlawed, and if so, can such a law actually be enforced?"

As we go down that list from top to bottom, the existence of encryption becomes increasingly hard for a government to prevent. With enough legislative consensus, a government can of course force domestic corporations to do whatever it wants them to do. However, they can't prevent foreign corporations from making or using end-to-end encryption available for use, and it's hard for them to realistically prevent individual software developers, domestically or internationally, from creating and distributing free open-source code that makes end-to-end encryption available for use.

**Attempts to Regulate Cryptocurrencies Like Banks**

When the automobile was introduced in the late 19th century, there were various public safety concerns (justifiably so) and competitive concerns about them. Executives in the horse-and-buggy industry were threatened by them, since automobiles represented superior technology compared to what they had to offer, and some of them were politically well-connected. Public opinion could be influenced with scare tactics, and policymakers naturally wanted to limit seemingly dangerous new technologies in public spaces, especially when pressured and financed by people in legacy industries.

This resulted in very restrictive laws being passed in the United States and United Kingdom for a period. These included limitations on automobile speed that were slower than human walking speed, the requirement for automobiles to yield to horse-drawn carriages, and the requirement of a person to literally walk in front of the automobile with a flag, which basically rendered the vehicle useless.[^430] These laws didn't last long since they were obviously untenable; they were attempts to restrict automobiles from the perspective of people with a horse-and-buggy mindset.

Similarly, the introduction of peer-to-peer monetary software represents a confusing and difficult-to-regulate situation for policymakers, and currently threatens some of their biggest financiers in the legacy banking system. Prior to the invention of Bitcoin, people had to go through the banking system if they wanted to transfer significant value over long distances. Governments could therefore impose various transaction restrictions by targeting the banks themselves, who then could restrict user transactions as needed. The peer-to-peer nature of Bitcoin, however, allows for global value transfer without going through a centralized third party, assuming no malicious entity can gain and maintain over 50% of network-wide processing power.

Additionally, as of this writing, smartphone adoption has surpassed bank account adoption on a global basis. Banks had centuries of a head start, but in a couple short decades, smartphones caught up and surpassed banks in terms of reaching more people. And with smartphones, people can store and transfer encrypted value via cryptocurrencies.

Various public debates and laws have therefore popped up among multiple governments when it comes to the regulation of cryptocurrencies, especially when it comes to self-custodying them or using various privacy techniques with them. The ability for people to store value self-custodially, send it to and receive from others, and use various privacy techniques to make those transactions harder to track, threatens government control over the financial system. Governments and banks want people to use their domestic centralized ledgers, not a global decentralized ledger. And they want ledgers to be able to be constantly surveilled, rather than to be private.

And as such, governments have tried to impose the full suite of bank-type restrictions on cryptocurrencies. What makes it hard, however, is that such laws must be enforced on the individual level (with millions of enforcement points) rather than just the bank level (which only has thousands of tightly regulated institutional enforcement points).

People don't just use privacy techniques to evade the government; they use privacy techniques to evade corporations that do their best to monetize their data and track their every move. Especially for a cryptocurrency which is a public ledger, many users want to use anonymization techniques to make it harder for corporations to track their spending. As it stands now, if you buy and withdraw bitcoin from a cryptocurrency exchange, and then spend that bitcoin on various goods and services, that exchange operator can track each expenditure that you make. The merchants you gave bitcoin to are also able to look at your address and see how much bitcoin you have, and perhaps trace it back through various earlier transactions. Therefore, people often anonymize their coins to create probabilistic obfuscation, which prevents corporations and merchants from tracking their transactions and wealth.

With these anonymization technologies, privacy is limited by liquidity. It's easier to make private Bitcoin transactions with small amounts than it is to make private transactions with large amounts. The volume of coinjoins, mixers, Lightning channels, privacy-themed cryptocurrencies, Chaumian mints, and other privacy techniques is still rather limited. In other words, as of this writing a normal tech-savvy individual can gain privacy with these technologies for an amount of money that is meaningful to them, but there isn't enough liquidity for a Russian oligarch or other billionaire to gain privacy with an amount of money that is meaningful to them.

The Digital Asset Anti-Money Laundering Act was proposed by two U.S. senators in 2022, and as of this writing is unlikely to pass. However, like many prior legislative attempts at curtailing encryption usage and overall privacy, it shows the direction that a significant subset of lawmakers would prefer to go in. The key text of the bill makes several businesses into money services businesses for regulatory purposes:

> MONEY SERVICE BUSINESS DESIGNATION.---The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network shall promulgate a rule classifying custodial and unhosted wallet providers, cryptocurrency miners, validators, or other nodes who may act to validate or secure third-party transactions, independent network participants, including MEV searchers, and other validators with control over network protocols as money service businesses.

Money service businesses are a subset of financial institutions, which is relevant for a later section of the bill that adds new rules for what financial institutions are prohibited from doing:

> The Secretary of the Treasury shall promulgate a rule that prohibits financial institutions from (1) handling, using, or transacting business with digital asset mixers, privacy coins, and other anonymity-enhancing technologies, as specified by the Secretary; and (2) handling, using, or transacting business with digital assets that have been anonymized by the technologies described in paragraph (1).[^431]

When asked if they are against money laundering, most people, including myself, say yes. Obviously, we don't want terrorists, human traffickers, malevolent dictators, or various violent criminals moving around money if we can help it. However, we must ask ourselves three questions. The first is: What should we all have to give up to ensure that the tiny fraction of the population that is engaged in those activities is prevented from doing them? For example, should governments around the world (including authoritarian ones) be able to automatically look into every possible transaction for the sake of preventing crime? The second question is: Can a government even enforce what they want to do in this area? For example, governments were able to shut down Napster (a centralized file-sharing platform) but couldn't shut down BitTorrent (a *de*centralized file-sharing method). Satoshi Nakamoto purposely built the Bitcoin network to be more like the latter. The third question is: How honest are governments and/or central banks about their motivations regarding these trade-offs? In 2022 and 2023, Argentina's central bank banned banks and then payment apps in the country from offering digital assets as they had been doing. At the time of the ban, Argentina was dealing with over 100% annual price inflation and uncontrolled money supply growth with its own fiat currency, while Argentinians were rapidly adopting bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies as an escape route, and banks were increasingly offering them to their customers. The monetary authorities conveniently cited the usual risks around volatility and money laundering, but of course it really had to do with trying to protect their own failing currency.[^432]

When we look at the U.S. Digital Asset Anti-Money Laundering Act (and I'm just using it as an example for illustrative purposes; there are many like it), we can see an immediate problem around "unhosted wallet providers." An unhosted wallet provider is merely a hardware device or software program that allows a user to control and interact with their own cryptocurrency keys --- which are just large numbers. Due to this proposed bill, therefore, a single developer of open-source software could be classified as a money service business and a financial institution. From there, as a financial institution, they are barred from handling or using digital asset mixers, privacy coins, or anonymization methods.

Therefore, if this were to be enacted into law as written, it would be illegal for an individual to create an open-source wallet software or cryptocurrency that uses privacy techniques. In other words, it's a form of control on the usage of math. Referring to the Zimmermann precedent, what if they publish the code in a book, and let the user do it themselves? What if they put the code on a t-shirt?

The challenge with such enforcement is that anyone in the world can generate a private key by flipping a coin 256 times, and anyone in the world can create open-source code that offers anonymization methods. If laws trying to prevent the existence and usage of these technologies are going to be enforced, they must be enforced on the individual level. The government must come and say, "you're not allowed to write that code" or "you're not allowed to run that non-malicious open-source software on your own laptop" along with some argument for how it goes against the public interest. The only chance a government has if they want to be somewhat successful in this effort would be to convince most of the public to go along with draconian anti-privacy and anti-open-source laws and harsh enforcement --- likely by equating the desire for privacy with inherent illegality.

These types of debates and battles are already being waged across various jurisdictions and are likely to become more intense over the next decade. There is an arms race between bottom-up developers creating increasingly ubiquitous and easy-to-use encryption and privacy techniques, and top-down governments and corporations creating increasingly ubiquitous surveillance and control techniques.


## Footnotes

[^426]: David Deming, *Science and Technology in World History, Volume 3*, 28--42.

[^427]: Eric Hughes, "A Cypherpunk's Manifesto."

[^428]: Hughes, "Cypherpunk's Manifesto."

[^429]: Jim Epstein, "When Encryption Was a Crime: The 1990s Battle for Free Speech in Software," *Reason*, October 21, 2020.

[^430]: Bill Loomis, "1910-1930: The Years of Driving Dangerously," *Detroit News*, April 26, 2015.

[^431]: U.S. Congress, "S.5267: Digital Asset Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2022."

[^432]: Ignacio Olivera Doll and Patrick Gillespie, "Argentina Slams Brake On Crypto, Banning Purchases Through Banks," *Bloomberg*, May 5, 2022; Mat Di Salvo, "Argentina Bans Payment Apps From Offering Bitcoin to Customers," *Decrypt*, May 5, 2023.

