# Chapter 30: **A World of Openness or a World of Control**

In May 2022, I found myself in a place I hadn't expected or planned to be: inside Norway's Parliament building in Oslo. I was talking to several Norwegian MPs as part of a twelve-person group sent by members of the Human Rights Foundation.

The goal of the Human Rights Foundation is to help provide basic rights for people in authoritarian or semi-authoritarian regimes. They reference the United Nation's International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights for their list of values, which was ratified by 173 countries in 1976 and includes:[^433]

- freedom of speech and expression

- the right to equal treatment and due process under law

- freedom from slavery and torture

- freedom of association

- the right to leave and enter their countries

- freedom from interference and coercion in matters of conscience

- the right to acquire and dispose of property

- freedom from arbitrary detainment or exile

- the right to worship in the manner of their choosing

- the right to participate in the government of their country

The context for my unusual situation was that several members of Norway's parliament were proposing to ban bitcoin mining in the country. The Human Rights Foundation, which was holding its annual Oslo Freedom Forum just down the street from the Parliament building at that time, had been making use of bitcoin and stablecoins as tools for human rights in places where authoritarian financial censorship is commonly used against human rights advocates. So, the Human Rights Foundation was invited to send a group of forum speakers over to Parliament to discuss this fact. Most of the members of the twelve-person group were human rights activists, and a few others such as me were brought along as subject matter experts that were able to answer questions in detail that might come up about how or why the Bitcoin network uses energy.

A few human rights activists in the group were from Nigeria, and they described to the members of Parliament how, when their bank accounts were frozen for protesting excessive violence by police in their country, they turned to using bitcoin for donations instead. The same had been true for Vladimir Putin's domestic political opposition, Alexei Navalny, as well. Faced with frequent bank account freezes, Navalny's organization in Russia had made use of bitcoin to collect and move funds to support their legitimate political opposition against Putin's dictatorial behavior. Others in the group talked about the problem of people being underbanked in many parts of the world, and how some of these technologies make storing and transmitting value far more efficient and accessible, which can connect people in some of the most impoverished areas to the global economy. When it came to me, I kept my part short and described how the Bitcoin network tends to use cheap and stranded energy, while being useful for its unique type of demand flexibility. Norway's electrical grid consists of over 90% clean hydro power, and especially in the northern part of the country they have plenty of stranded resources to help support such a valuable network. Private companies were already happily doing it, and my view was that there was no reason for the government to step in and stop them from doing so.

Several months prior to that meeting, across the ocean in Canada, there was a large trucker convoy protest, which had gathered people across the country into the nation's capital to protest COVID-19 vaccine mandates and mobility restrictions. In 2021, Canada had enacted increasingly strict policies around mobility. People could not ride trains or planes without proof of vaccination, meaning they were restricted from moving within the country and, importantly, had no realistic way to even leave the country if they were not vaccinated, since they could not fly and could not cross the U.S. land border. In early 2022, Canada further tightened this by requiring truckers entering Canada to show proof of vaccination as well. International covenants do allow for temporary suspensions of certain rights during emergencies (e.g., mobility restrictions), but this was happening years into the pandemic when the vaccine was increasingly understood by that point to be temporary, and with limitations regarding its ability to prevent transmission.

Any large protest has extremist characters associated with it, but by and large the protest was a peaceful and economic one. The Canadian protests disrupted local businesses and put pressure on the government by blocking traffic, but on the other hand, they were supported by many regular people who felt boxed into a corner. The whole purpose of protests is to create awareness through disruptions, and it requires ongoing cost of time and/or money by the protestors to maintain it, which naturally limits the duration and magnitude of the disruption of the protest depending on the severity of what they are protesting for and how committed they are to it.[^434]

Donations began to pour in to support the protestors, with both fiat currency and bitcoin. Benjamin Tyler Perrin, a well-known educator regarding Bitcoin-related technologies, helped put together a donation portal for people to send bitcoin to support the truckers. Perrin, who had previously voted for Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's party but who had later opposed their imposition of vaccine mandates and mobility restrictions, thought the donations would be small and uncontested by the government. However, as numerous donation portals such as GoFundMe were told to shut down their services without funds being delivered, the Bitcoin network became one of the only ways for donations to make it to the intended recipients.

The government of Canada subsequently enacted emergency powers and began telling banks to freeze bank accounts of certain protesters, as well as certain individuals that had merely donated to protesters. Many of these were without court orders, and the line between government and bank actions became blurred.[^435]

However, self-custodial bitcoin holdings could not be frozen. Domestic cryptocurrency exchanges could blacklist certain known addresses, making it less convenient to exchange bitcoin for Canadian dollars through those specific portals, but other than that, there were limits to what the government could do automatically and remotely. There are plenty of ways to spend bitcoin or exchange bitcoin. If authorities wanted someone's bitcoin, they needed to show up at their door, literally or figuratively, with a warrant or threat of some kind. In other words, the usage of bitcoins added a considerable cost to enact financial censorship. Unlike most other donations that were blocked entirely, two-thirds of bitcoin donations made it to their intended recipients, and only the remaining third was confiscated with the use of targeted enforcement.

In February 2022, during the protest, I wrote on social media about this nuance, while purposely avoiding the subject of vaccines or Canadian political partisanship directly. My conclusion was that technologies that make it harder to freeze money are not about avoiding legitimate laws, but rather, are about ensuring that governments themselves follow their own laws. As I wrote at the time:

> Custodial financial services allow governments to freeze accounts first, and then sort out who is guilty or innocent later. Self-custodial financial services force governments to actually charge people with a crime before they can use pressure to freeze their accounts.
>
> Custodial money often can\'t be withdrawn from a jurisdiction if for whatever reason rule of law breaks down there. Self-custodial money can be withdrawn from a jurisdiction if the individual is able to move their self elsewhere (and sometimes, even if they can\'t).
>
> It\'s not a \"right or left\" issue, because one merely needs to imagine their least-favorite politician winning the next election, or two or three elections from now. Most people are in favor of rule of law, but the questions are \"which law?\" and \"in which order?\"
>
> Thus, bitcoin and cryptocurrencies aren\'t really about \"avoiding the law\" but rather are about putting the onus on governments to act within the law, and giving individuals more mobility options when governments begin to change the law in a way that trends away from liberty.[^436]

I personally took the pandemic seriously as it emerged and supported efforts to produce vaccines and distribute them when they became available to those that wanted them. However, due to the temporary effectiveness of the coronavirus vaccines and some of the other nuances involved, I did not support government mandates for the general public to get vaccinated, nor did I support placing significant top-down mobility or employment restrictions on people based on their vaccination status. This touches on an age-old political debate between individualist and collectivist policies, but my point here is to highlight the right to protest rather than to highlight the subject of the protest itself, which for any given protest I might agree or disagree with.

A similar concept applies to the broad practice of civil forfeitures. In the United States, billions of dollars per year in cash, jewelry, and other valuables are taken from people by police without charging them with a crime. If someone travels through an airport with cash or valuables or gets pulled over while carrying a lot of cash or valuables, in many jurisdictions the police can simply take the cash or valuables despite not charging the person with violating any law. The person then must go through time-consuming and expensive proceedings if they have any hope of getting their assets back, which is a bigger hurdle for regular people to do than wealthy people.[^437] This practice occurs on a global scale, to varying degrees, and puts the burden of proof on the person to get their assets back rather than on the authority that seized the asset in the first place.

I met Benjamin Tyler Perrin at the Oslo Freedom Forum in May 2022, months after his involvement in the donation portal. He is by no means an extremist or hyper-partisan person. In a public interview with Peter McCormack, he described that when the government began cracking down on bank accounts and donation portals associated with the protest, he was concerned for the safety of himself and his family. He has also publicly said that had he known ahead of time that the political environment would have become so adversarial, he could have constructed the donation portal using more private, unstoppable means. As he has described, it didn't occur to him at the time that the government would step in and attempt to prevent the disbursement of protest-related donations, and so he did not emphasize privacy when setting up the donation portal. And yet it still succeeded more than GoFundMe and other similar centralized donation portals.[^438]

Financial censorship against protestors or political opposition is a common tool in authoritarian and semi-authoritarian regimes, but shades of it occasionally pop up in democracies as well, usually around wars or other extreme events. When choosing to support or oppose the usage of such tools in a given context, one must keep in mind that any power the government has can be used in the reverse context as well. For real freedom to exist, it must be held above any specific interest, rather than something that is easy to take away from groups that we may not like. In other words, due process should occur for the most virtuous groups and the most odious groups alike.

The Bitcoin network was built and initially adopted by people of the cypherpunk movement, which, as previously mentioned, refers to those advocating widespread use of cryptography and privacy-enhancing technologies as a route to social and political change. From that base, a broader subset of libertarian-minded people became enthusiastic supporters of the network as well.[^439] As of this writing, there are more politicians associated with the Republican Party in the United States who embrace Bitcoin compared to politicians associated with the Democratic Party, although there are some of both.

From its inception Bitcoin has always had somewhat of a political element to it. As of this writing, it's the world\'s largest and most successful attempt at a stateless digital currency, and that fact carries some political weight to it. Encryption initially allowed for the private sharing of information, and now encryption also allows for the private sharing of value. Information and value are the two components needed for individuals to conduct trade.

But what *exactly* is the political nature of the network? Is it only for cypherpunks and libertarians? What if someone has a favorable view of their country's government? Is Bitcoin not for them? Can we determine someone's political views based on their opinion of digital assets?

Some of the most-cited books by libertarians and critics of government in general are *Animal Farm* and *Nineteen Eighty-Four*, written by George Orwell. To this day, these remain some of the most powerful novels that emphasize anti-authoritarian themes. But what many people don't realize in the context of today is that George Orwell was a democratic socialist. He favored large government, but only if that government was of the transparent and democratically elected variety. Anti-authoritarianism doesn't exclusively belong to the political right or the political left. It just gets expressed by those sides in different ways. And arguably the most well-known anti-authoritarian writer happens to have been on the left on the political spectrum.

After the 2008 global financial crisis and bank bailouts by the U.S. federal government, there were Tea Party protests by people mainly on the political right and Occupy Wall Street protests mainly by people on the political left. Both groups were protesting aspects of the same underlying problem: When the financial system broke in 2008, those who were at the helm of the intertwined government-corporate power structure could use the flexible public ledger to selectively bail out who they wanted --- and they prioritized bailing out those who were already rich and powerful.

Today, Bitcoin as a network collects members from both types of groups, and partially organizes them in an emergent way by giving them something to use and build on, so that they don't have to rely only on protesting. It offers them a way to potentially opt out of the existing financial system that they view as being heavily corrupted, and to build a parallel peer-to-peer financial system instead. It is for this reason that many proponents of the Bitcoin network describe their activities as a peaceful revolution. So, while the technology does have political implications, it's not inherently partisan.

In 2022, there was a significant rise in the visibility of Bitcoin proponents who identified as progressives, referring to people that generally lean to the left in terms of political persuasion both socially and fiscally. Many of them had been active in the ecosystem for a while, but during the period between 2021 and 2022 many of them connected with each other and were given more significant stages to speak on. One of the largest Bitcoin-focused podcasters, Peter McCormack, specifically dedicated the year to featuring more Bitcoin proponents from the political left on his show (such as Jason Maier, author of *A Progressive's Case for Bitcoin*) to counterbalance what he viewed as a broadly conservative or libertarian culture within the Bitcoin podcasting and media circuit. Their presence at events increased rapidly from there. I personally know many Bitcoin proponents from across the political spectrum and from around the world.

A theme that many left-leaning Bitcoin proponents have in common is that they view the Bitcoin network as a tool to curtail the overreach of corporations and crony capitalism, in similar ways that many right-leaning Bitcoin proponents view the Bitcoin network as a tool to curtail the overreach of the state. This is not contradictory because, in the broadest sense, the Bitcoin network is a tool (among many other tools) that provides a check on many forms of consolidated power, including both the corporate and government varieties. At the highest levels of power, governments and corporations become intertwined anyway, with Big Defense, Big Food, Big Agriculture, Big Pharma, Big Tech, Big Oil, and so forth all having considerable influence over spending-related legislation. With such a flexible public ledger, governments can favor any corporation they want, and corporations can use their financial scale to help ensure that their preferred government officials get in power and stay in power so that they can further favor them as a corporation. There's a revolving door between the regulators and the regulated, and Bitcoin was designed to take back part of that public ledger.

In other words, as demonstrated by George Orwell's famous works, anti-authoritarian viewpoints come from multiple political perspectives. People can disagree with each other on various political topics --- including what the precise tax rate should be and which services government should provide --- and still have a strong appreciation of freedom of expression, property rights, ease of doing business, the right to move within or out of a country, the right to privacy, the ability to transact, and the freedom to use tools to avoid the debasement of their hard-earned savings. To the extent that people disagree about what the government should spend money on, most people at least agree that the money should be spent transparently. It was people on the political left more so than the political right, for example, who from the beginning protested the United States' War on Iraq, which cost trillions of dollars, ended an uncountable number of lives, and was financed primarily by opaque methods through the long-term debasement of the currency and greatly benefited large corporate defense contractors.

In his 1961 farewell address, President Eisenhower warned against the rise of the military industrial complex. During Eisenhower's lifetime, the United States had gone from a country that only raised significant military forces in response to a threat, to one that now needed to maintain a large military at all times. While he viewed this as necessary, he warned against the dangers that it could cause:

> A vital element in keeping the peace is our military establishment. Our arms must be mighty, ready for instant action, so that no potential aggressor may be tempted to risk his own destruction.
>
> Our military organization today bears little relation to that known by any of my predecessors in peace time, or indeed by the fighting men of World War II or Korea.
>
> Until the latest of our world conflicts, the United States had no armaments industry. American makers of plowshares could, with time and as required, make swords as well. But now we can no longer risk emergency improvisation of national defense; we have been compelled to create a permanent armaments industry of vast proportions. Added to this, three and a half million men and women are directly engaged in the defense establishment. We annually spend on military security more than the net income of all United State corporations.
>
> This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience. The total influence --- economic, political, even spiritual --- is felt in every city, every state house, every office of the Federal government. We recognize the imperative need for this development. Yet we must not fail to comprehend its grave implications. Our toil, resources and livelihood are all involved; so is the very structure of our society.
>
> In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist.
>
> We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes. We should take nothing for granted only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together.[^440]

In his speech, he also talked about the dangers of the centralization of power and the financial tendency to sacrifice the future to enhance the ease and convenience of the present:

> The prospect of domination of the nation\'s scholars by Federal employment, project allocations, and the power of money is ever present and is gravely to be regarded.
>
> Yet, in holding scientific research and discovery in respect, as we should, we must also be alert to the equal and opposite danger that public policy could itself become the captive of a scientific-technological elite.
>
> It is the task of statesmanship to mold, to balance, and to integrate these and other forces, new and old, within the principles of our democratic system --- ever aiming toward the supreme goals of our free society.
>
> Another factor in maintaining balance involves the element of time. As we peer into society\'s future, we --- you and I, and our government --- must avoid the impulse to live only for today, plundering, for our own ease and convenience, the precious resources of tomorrow. We cannot mortgage the material assets of our grandchildren without risking the loss also of their political and spiritual heritage. We want democracy to survive for all generations to come, not to become the insolvent phantom of tomorrow.

Unfortunately, these things have generally increased after Eisenhower left office. Defense contractors, large banks, large multinational corporations, and their armies of lobbyists have firmly intertwined themselves with politicians. Public debts have been accumulated, the economy has become hollowed-out and financialized, and the United States' political establishment focuses heavily on pseudo-imperial ambitions (via hundreds of foreign military bases, trillions of dollars spent on non-defensive wars, billions of dollars spent on covert operations to change political regimes in dozens of countries) --- all while manufacturing capabilities and logistics infrastructure stagnate in the homeland, leading to rising political polarization and populism among the citizenry.

Bitcoin developers and educators are often not the "white crypto bros" or "shadowy super-coders" that politicians and media make them out to be.[^441] There are people of many different backgrounds across the political spectrum and around the world who, for a variety of reasons, have found the idea of an open-source ledger that gives power to individuals to be an important thing to dedicate their work toward. While there is a lot of fraud and grift in the broad cryptocurrency ecosystem (it has been enticing and lucrative for developers and venture capitalists to create unregistered security tokens out of thin air and dump them on retail investors), people working in the Bitcoin-only space have tended to be doing what they do for ethical and pragmatic reasons.

Obi Nwosu is a British entrepreneur of Nigerian descent who founded the United Kingdom's longest-running bitcoin exchange, and then founded a company called Fedi that serves as a bitcoin wallet aimed at decentralizing and distributing bitcoin custody as much as possible. Fedi implements the open-source Fedimint protocol to allow local communities around the world to easily build their own private community banks, with an emphasis on users in developing countries. From there, the community banks can provide other services to their users as well, such as data storage, processing, and a variety of sub-applications.

Anita Posch is an Austrian woman who frequently travels to African countries to teach people how to use the Bitcoin network. She is supported by donations, and she reports on what she finds in her published works. Her focus is on human rights, and specifically on helping people access the ability to save and spend money in areas where the local financial system is broken. She has written about the problematic state of freedom globally, including from her own perspective as a lesbian woman who feels fortunate to have been born in Europe, and so her goal has been to help make the world a fairer place.

Troy Cross is a philosophy professor at a liberal arts college, and an environmentalist who focuses on Bitcoin's unique ability to make productive use of stranded energy in a way that he views as being beneficial for human rights. As he has described publicly, he was originally concerned about Bitcoin's environmental impact, but after researching it in detail, he changed his mind and became a strong advocate for it. Cross now regularly educates people about the topic, combats disinformation, and promotes methods to make bitcoin mining as sustainable as possible.

Alex Gladstein is the Chief Strategic Officer of the Human Rights Foundation, and wrote a book called *Check Your Financial Privilege* that extensively catalogued the use of bitcoin and stablecoins by people in inflationary and authoritarian jurisdictions around the world. Alex and the Human Rights Foundation have hosted several private retreats where human rights activists from authoritarian countries, software developers, and venture capitalists meet to discuss technologies that would be useful for human rights activists and their communities if they were to be developed, and for people to learn about some of the latest technologies that have recently been developed.

Elizabeth Stark and Olaoluwa Osuntoken, the co-founders and leaders of Lightning Labs since 2016, led the deployment of the most widely used Lightning node implementation to this day. Stark, who has a J.D. from Harvard Law School, regularly speaks around the world on the topic of bringing open-source monetary technology to billions of people in developing countries. Osuntoken, a computer scientist and applied cryptographer, co-authored *Mastering the Lightning Network,* which is the primary technical book regarding Bitcoin's Lightning Network.

Farida Nabourema is a democracy advocate from the authoritarian country of Togo, and currently lives in exile. In her country, she saw firsthand how authorities used financial surveillance and the freezing of bank accounts to suppress democracy advocates. In addition to advocating for democracy, she has been a vocal critic of French monetary neocolonialism in Africa, and a vocal proponent of the Bitcoin network since she sees it as a tool for freedom. In late 2022, she and others put together the Africa Bitcoin Conference in Ghana, where people from around the world came to speak and gather.

Paco de la India, a runner from India, was challenged by his friend in 2021 to travel the world using bitcoin, and was gifted a book on the subject by him. Paco subsequently decided to blend his existing passion with running with his newfound obsession with Bitcoin, to run in 40 countries in 400 days, while using bitcoin as a transaction medium wherever possible. From Kenya to Sudan to Sri Lanka to South Africa to Cuba and elsewhere, he has visited dozens of countries (mostly developing ones) to educate people with workshops about Bitcoin in person.

Yan Pritzker is the co-founder and chief technical officer of Swan.com. When he was a child, he and his family left the Soviet Union, and like most others, they were only allowed to take \$100 with them. He has described bitcoin as a tool for empowerment that allows refugees from authoritarian countries and failed states, if they are able to physically escape, to bring savings with them. Capital naturally wants to flow from unfree places to free places, wherever possible.

Renata Rodrigues, originally from Brazil, has spent the past several years developing peer-to-peer Bitcoin communities in developing countries, including in places where banks have shut themselves off from cryptocurrency exchanges. While many critics in developed markets view bitcoin as a mere tool for speculation, mainly just a number to trade on a computer screen, she has a boots-on-the-ground approach to help build Bitcoin-based communities in regions with inflating currencies and low banking access.

I think these people are justified in seeing things this way, and doing the work that they do. According to Freedom House's methodology, global freedom has been on the decline since 2005, with 17 consecutive years of more countries dropping in their ranking than rising in their ranking. The 1980s, 1990s, and early 2000s were characterized by increasing freedom and openness in the world. In particular, the economic liberalization of China and the collapse of the Soviet Union partially freed up large portions of the world in various ways, both socially and economically. However, the late 2000s, 2010s, and 2020s have been characterized by decreasing economic openness, heightened forms of surveillance, and a reduction in personal liberty.[^442]

Russia has pulled back its level of freedom under the leadership of Vladimir Putin, and the same is true for China under Xi Jinping. Several countries in their spheres of influence have done the same, ranging from Türkiye to Thailand to Hungary. Many governments around the world have turned to populist strongmen leaders who have pressured journalists and have blamed religious minorities or sexual minorities or political minorities or vague outsiders for many of their country's economic woes. Meanwhile, Freedom House's score for the United States still categorizes it as "free," but at a lower value than it used to be at its height. The 2001 Patriot Act, various corruptions within the criminal justice system, and other issues have chipped away at freedom in the United States around the margins.

There are multiple factors that have contributed to this, but I contend that the malfunctioning global financial system has played a large role. As I discussed in Part 3 and Part 4 of this book, the global financial system tends to be reconstructed every several decades, in part because geopolitics and technological capabilities change over time, and in part because problems associated with the long-term debt cycle and misaligned policymaker incentives build up in the financial system and its associated institutions. Over the past two centuries, the world went from free banking and bimetallic coinage, to a central bank gold standard, to the Bretton Woods system, and then to the Eurodollar/Petrodollar system. Each system eventually became antiquated and strained, and ultimately fell apart under its own entropy, until it was reconstructed toward something new. Today, many signs suggest that the current version of the global financial system is breaking down once again. The combination of large sovereign debts after decades of deficit spending, increasing wealth concentration, and a shift from a unipolar to a multipolar world order, is putting a lot of pressure on various fiat currency systems.[^443] As wealth concentrates toward the top and as people begin to feel that the economic system is no longer working well for them, people tend to turn toward populism. It's a cycle as old as civilization.

Populism comes in many forms, but the far sides of the political spectrum contain several extremist elements. In an increasingly chaotic world, people often want order at any cost, even if it includes giving up some liberty. They want to be told by a seemingly strong leader what the problem is and what the plan will be to fix it. Sadly, what the strong leader proposes the problem to be usually ends up being a cruel misdiagnosis that sacrifices the most vulnerable in society in favor of the cultural majority, or that breaks down the economic incentives that create the efficient production of goods and services in the first place.

This book repeatedly explored the question of "who controls the ledger?" and the answer to that question has shifted over time. In early history, the answer was that local communities and nature (for commodity money) controlled the ledger. As some civilizations gained large technological advantages over others, their technology gave those advanced civilizations a way to basically control the ledgers of the less advanced civilizations they encountered by producing a lot of certain types of commodity money that those less advanced civilizations thought was rare. With the rise of banking and central banking in a telecommunication-enhanced world, where gold was too slow to serve as money anymore, the ledger became increasingly centralized and controlled by nation states. Governments and their central banks essentially acquired a monopoly on fast, long-distance money transmission, which gave them more flexibility to devalue the savings of people within their borders and channel that value toward their goals in opaque ways. Going forward, bottom-up digital monies such as bitcoin attempt to give the ledger back to the people, while top-down digital monies such as central bank digital currencies give nation states even more control over the ledger that people use.

When it comes to control of the ledger, there are two main parts. The first question is, "Who can surveil and censor the transactions of others, or freeze their funds?" The second question is, "Who can create money nearly for free and devalue the savings and wages of others?"

If some group can create money at a cost that is significantly below the current market value, then they have gained the power of seigniorage, and therefore control the ledger entirely or in part. In contrast, if nobody can create money for free, such as in a world of collectible commodity proto-monies between tribes of similar technical proficiency, then nobody has the power of seigniorage, and nature alone controls the ledger. If one group gains a sufficient degree of technical superiority over another culture, and becomes able to cheaply create the glass beads, shell necklaces, rai stones, cocoa beans, or other such stores of value that the group with less technology stores their wealth in, then they have gained the power of seigniorage --- at least until people identify the problem and stop using that type of corrupted money.

In fiat currency systems, sovereign governments and central banks can create money nearly for free, which everyone else is supposed to treat as valuable within a jurisdiction, even as it is continually diluted. Many countries mismanage their ledgers dramatically, resulting in massive increases in the money supply and aggregate prices. When people try to flee from it toward other ledgers or assets to protect their savings, authorities rarely take responsibility for the problem and instead tend to blame speculators and outside forces, and therefore often try to block the exits.

Gold has long been turned to as a form of defense and savings, but it's not a useful transactional money in the digital age. The Bitcoin network presents a newer and faster alternative, where nobody can create bitcoin for free, and thus nobody has the power of seigniorage. Similarly, nobody can censor transactions unless they control over 50% of the network's active processing power. And it can move globally without the need for central banks as bottlenecks. However, the network is still in its relative infancy, and it remains to be seen how robust it will be in the face of bigger attacks from large governments that may try to protect their own centralized monetary systems as they become destabilized from their own entropy over time.

In Part 3 of this book, I quoted John Maynard Keynes about how those who control the public ledger can redirect value from one group to another, without people really knowing about it:

> By a continuing process of inflation, governments can confiscate, secretly and unobserved, an important part of the wealth of their citizens. By this method they not only confiscate, but they confiscate arbitrarily; and, while the process impoverishes many, it actually enriches some.[^444]

The idea of separating money and state is not about eliminating the state. Instead, the idea is about creating a decentralized monetary technology that, if it were to be widely adopted and resistant to attacks, would put the state more on a level playing field with everyone else. Governments would need to be more transparent with their actions in a world where fast, portable, self-custodial, globally transmissible, debasement-proof peer-to-peer money is widely held, since it gives people more options. With 160 fiat currencies in the world, and over half of the world's population living under various shades of authoritarianism, this is no small objective. Open-source money in the form of bitcoin may eventually become large enough to compete with the U.S. dollar more directly, but the low-hanging fruit for now is that the technology offers an alternative to billions of people who use failing currencies in any number of jurisdictions that many people rarely think about. It also allows for much faster innovation in money and opens entirely new applications that are not possible with existing technology.

If politics in many parts of the world continue to shift away from freedom and toward varying levels of authoritarianism as they have in the past two decades, then control of the public ledger may become even more important than it has been in recent decades. In less free parts of the world, the user of a centrally controlled currency has decreasing control and decreasing transparency into how the public ledger is being managed. At the same time, governments and corporations have increasing control and insight into everyone's small allocation of the ledger, including how much they have and how they are allowed to use it.

While politics can impact how we interact with money locally and temporarily, it's technology that impacts how we interact with money globally and permanently. As new technologies come into existence, certain types of ledgers become obsolete and go extinct while new types of ledgers are born and become necessary. That's why new forms of money tend to be adopted everywhere rather than just locally. As the world became increasingly industrialized, gold won out over every other commodity. And then as the world became increasingly connected by telecommunication systems, fiat currencies displaced gold in every country. Now that digital scarcity and digital settlement exist as new forms of technology, there is an opening for a new monetary era yet again.

Throughout history, most updates to monetary technology have been centralizing, and have consolidated power into a smaller number of hands in exchange for greater efficiency. Now, there's a real window of opportunity to decentralize some of that power and disperse it more broadly. Additionally, the ever-greater speed gap between transactions and settlements has resulted in ever-greater levels of financialization and abstraction. Now, with the acceleration of settlements and the subsequent closing of that speed gap, there's the possibility to move toward a period of financial simplification and greater robustness.

We cannot know the future. The best that we can do is analyze the present, envision what we think the future should be like, and then play our individual roles to move toward that vision. In my view, open-source decentralized money that empowers individuals, that is permissionless to use, and that allows for a more borderless flow of value, is both powerful and ethical. The concept presents an improvement to the current financial system in many ways and provides a check on excessive power, which makes it worth exploring and supporting.


## Footnotes

[^433]: Available via <https://hrf.org/about/mission/>

[^434]: Peter Chawaga, "Honk Honk HODL: How Bitcoin Fueled the Freedom Convoy and Defied Government Crackdown," *Bitcoin Magazine*: The Censorship Resistant issue, April 2022.

[^435]: Ben Perrin, "Enemy of the State," *What Bitcoin Did*, December 22, 2022.

[^436]: Lyn Alden, "Custodial Financial Services," *Twitter*, February 19, 2022.

[^437]: Cassie Miller, "Civil Asset Forfeiture: Unfair, Undemocratic and Un-American."

[^438]: Perrin, "Enemy of the State." One scheme that could have been used by the Canadian truckers for more private donations was laid out by Econoalchemist, "How the Freedom Convoy Could Have Protected Donation Privacy with Whirlpool," *Bitcoin Magazine*, March 31, 2022.

[^439]: Finn Brunton traces that history in *Digital Cash: The Unknown History of the Anarchists, Utopians, and Technologists Who Created Cryptocurrency*.

[^440]: Dwight Eisenhower, "Farewell Address," January 17, 1961.

[^441]: E.g., Kevin Roose, "The Latecomer's Guide to Crypto," *New York Times*, March 18, 2022.

[^442]: Sarah Repucci and Amy Slipowitz, *The Global Expansion of Authoritarian Rule*.

[^443]: Dalio, *Changing World Order*, 264, 331--362.

[^444]: Keynes, *Essays in Persuasion*, 77.
