# Acknowledgements

Writing a book of this scale is a huge undertaking and is only possible with enormous support.

Firstly, I want to thank those who were directly involved in the creation of this book. My husband, Mohamed Badran, provided invaluable structural editing and early feedback to ensure a clear reading experience. Joakim Book performed extensive editing and research assistance as a professional monetary historian, which helped elevate the quality immensely.

There are over 400 citations in the book, and countless people in the past and present whose work has influenced its creation. Importantly, I consider some of the cited works that I *disagree* with to be as important from a research perspective as those I agree with, because they help test the ideas and sharpen the conclusions. Since I can't mention them all here, I encourage the reader to look through the footnotes and bibliography, and I am grateful for all the published materials that people have created that I've been able to cite here or that I've drawn inspiration from.

In addition to all of the historical famous writers that influence everything, some contemporary writers, investors, humanitarians, and/or business leaders whose work has been among the most heavily cited or influential for this book include Alex Gladstein, Ray Dalio, Stanley Druckenmiller, Barry Eichengreen, George Selgin, Luke Gromen, Saifedean Ammous, Nick Szabo, Adam Back, Elizabeth Stark, Michael Saylor, Jeff Booth, John Pfeffer, Caitlin Long, Gigi, Nic Carter, Obi Nwosu, Yan Pritzker, and Anita Posch.

All profits from the first thousand copies sold will be donated to the Human Rights Foundation, which in addition to helping people has also been a useful source of research in my work.

