# Chapter 1: Ledgers as the Foundation of Money

Many people think that money as a concept starts with something like coins or shells, but the story really begins before that. It begins as a ledger.

A ledger is a summary of transactions and is used to keep track of who owns what. The oldest known written ledgers date back over 5,000 years to ancient Mesopotamia in the form of clay tablets. According to Encyclopedia Britannica, Sumerian is the oldest known type of writing in existence, and the oldest known instances of Sumerian writing were clay ledgers that kept track of commodities.[^8] They showed pictures of various commodities and had dots next to them that represented quantities. In other words, the first ideas that humans are known to have written down with their early proto-scripts were lists of ownership, credit, or transactions.[^9]

But ledgers as a concept can be even simpler than that. And prior to the invention of writing, they must have existed to some degree in memory and in oral form. Anytime somebody owed something to someone else, either formally or informally, they were inherently maintaining a basic oral ledger.

At the simplest level, with a modern example, let's imagine two child siblings named Alice and Bobby. They are old enough that their parents task them with chores, and as they grow and start to lead more complex lives, occasionally they need to rearrange their schedules. Alice, for example, might need to skip chores one night so that she can go out with her friends. To do this, she can offer to her brother Bobby that if he covers her chores today, she'll cover his chores tomorrow. As he accepts the offer, they have just created a basic mental ledger and a form of credit. Alice now owes Bobby a specific set of chores. This is enforceable only through trust and reputation: If Alice does not repay her debts, then Bobby will likely refuse future trades. If it remains simple enough, their little ledger will be a verbal one only, but if their schedules get complex enough and they trade around chores on a regular basis, they might use a calendar as a written ledger. There is no specific monetary unit associated with this ledger --- it's just a barter system. The only units involved are individual chores. The ledger merely keeps track of individual chores that are swapped over time, as a form of credit.

We can also imagine a group of hunters, perhaps tens of thousands of years ago in a tribe somewhere, counting how many kills they each had made, or loosely keeping track of who did whom a favor. Tribes throughout the world had (and still have) various ways of selecting leaders formally or informally, and the process is often meritocratic to some degree. Whether intending to or not, people approximately keep track of deeds and reputations of others, to see who provides the group with a surplus and who is a burden.

Early human social groups generally consisted of dozens of individuals, forming a band. Various bands within a geographic area, with a closely related culture, would then often recognize themselves as being part of a larger interconnected tribal culture. Within a group where everyone knows each other, money isn't needed, aside from oral and memory-based ledgers. Favors can be loosely tracked, and it is usually clear who is pulling their weight and who isn't. Groups of this nature would typically consist of kinships and friendships, so the exact "score" didn't need to be tracked. The ledger would be approximate, loose, and flexible.[^10]

Back in my engineering days, a subset of my colleagues and I often went out to lunch together. We loosely kept track of who drove the small group each time, so that we could roughly balance it out. It wasn't written down, and it wasn't exact, but there was indeed a rough mental ledger that we collectively kept track of. The same was true for driving co-workers to the mechanic or to the airport and having the favor returned later (before ride-sharing apps were commonplace), or lending someone a bit of cash in a moment where they were short on it (for example, when splitting a cash restaurant bill, which used to happen more often back in those days). These favors were never phrased in terms of "I'll do this for you now, but you have to reciprocate in the future." Rather, such a favor was happily provided as a gift when asked for, and then it would be assumed that if a reciprocal favor was asked for later, that it would be happily returned.

Considerable research by anthropologists on hunter-gatherer tribes has found similar gift-oriented behavior as a recurring theme. While cultures of course vary substantially, individuals that know each other generally give gifts or favors and then naturally expect sharing in return.[^11] That's a big piece of what friendship is.[^12]

The situation becomes more difficult once we start interacting with people we don't know well, and that we either don't trust or that we may never see again. If two groups encounter each other in a primal environment, for example, it introduces the risk of violence, but it also opens the possibility for trade.

Spot trading is an obvious first step to transacting with people we don't know well. Rather than extend them a form of informal gift credit like we would do with our family and friends, we ideally want to finalize any transaction *on the spot*, since there's a high likelihood that we'll never meet them again. Two groups encounter each other, both of which have resources but also some capacity for violence, if need be, and through basic language or gestures they complete a trade. Perhaps one band has an excess of spears but needs furs, and the other band has an excess of furs but needs spears. They can trade furs for spears on the spot, and both groups are better off. Anthropologists have documented multiple instances of ritualized trade between different hunter-gatherer groups, often involving the prospect for mating as well.

If there is not already an established ritual process between relatively equal groups in the region, and instead some parties come across each other more haphazardly, there is a high probability that a trading attempt will fail, due to not fulfilling the "double coincidence of wants." A double coincidence of wants is an economic description that means that for the trade to be successful, each party must have an excess of what the other wants. If both parties are short on spears, the trade will fail. If both parties are short on furs, the trade will fail. There are more combinations that lead to a failed trade than a successful one.

It's much easier to trade with our friendly band members than to trade with strangers, because with family and friends we have the luxury of trust and time, which we can consider a form of flexible social credit. Someone can ask me for a favor, and I can do it for them, even if there is absolutely nothing that I want from them now. I could have all the excess food, furs, and tools I need, and yet when someone I know has a shortage of something or needs me to spend time helping them with something, I can do them a favor and provide it.[^13]

In addition to it feeling good, the reason I would extend this gift-credit to someone I know is because I anticipate that eventually there will be a time when I need something. Maybe I will become ill or injured or pregnant and unable to collect food for some time and will then rely on the person I am giving a favor to now. By providing a surplus of favors, I increase my social standing and thus my social safety in the group. The same logic applies in modern times when helping friends, neighbors, and family. Of course, I likely won't be thinking so mechanistically when I perform a favor; I may simply do it because I'm biologically wired to feel good when I help someone out, due to thousands of generations of biological selection for this trait that led my ancestors to survive and thrive as intelligent and generous social animals. But in the back of my mind, the conscious mental calculations are inevitably there as well: By doing this favor I am strengthening the whole group, including myself, and I am banking some personal insurance or social savings for myself and/or my close kin in the future. I'm expending current work or resources during my time of abundance and in return I am collecting some savings in our collective social ledger. This social credit, this informal mental ledger, is the friend-and-kin group solution to the "double coincidence of wants" problem. With flexible social credit, we can easily help each other when one person needs something even if the other person currently needs nothing.

In a 2010 study called "Wealth Transmission and Inequality Among Hunter-Gatherers," that referenced a wide variety of existing literature, the researchers noted that social insurance can in some cases be based on the reputation of the person in need and the quality of their social network:

> Most adults in hunter-gatherer societies actively contribute to food production and processing, as well as tool manufacture and maintenance. In addition, child care and provisioning is generally a parental duty. Most of these forms of labor require considerable strength and stamina, visual acuity, and other aspects of good health. As a result, we expect somatic wealth to be of prime importance to success and well-being. On the other hand, those who suffer periodically from suboptimal somatic endowments can usually rely on aid from others in the form of food-sharing, assistance with child care, and protection in disputes. This social insurance is normative and widely available, but some evidence suggests that the quality of such aid will vary according to the "relational wealth" (reputation, size and quality of the social network) of the needy individual or household (Gurven, et al. 2000; Wiessner 2002; Nolin 2008).[^14]

Early in the famous movie *The Godfather*, a man asks Vito the mob boss for a favor, and Vito agrees to do it for him. The price Vito asks for in return, rather than money, is an unspecified favor sometime in the future. In other words, he wants flexible social credit. This is because this man needs something from Vito, Vito needs absolutely nothing from this man now, and yet Vito knows the man and recognizes that the man is part of his wider community. Vito is in the business of collecting favors and then calling them in when it is advantageous to him. Later in the movie, Vito indeed calls in the favor; he develops a need that this man is uniquely suited to provide, and it was a need that Vito didn't have early in the movie. Vito's story is of a man who tries to maximize his family's relational wealth by maintaining an extensive ledger of favors, with these favors serving as a form of credit-based currency in the mob's shadow economy.

Going back to our trading example between separate bands of people, since they lack this option of flexible social credit or ledgers (they don't trust each other and might never see each other again after this meetup), what could they bring to a trade that they expect to have a very high likelihood of being wanted by the other party? If I was in their situation, could I think of something to bring that almost everyone wants, all the time? In other words, is there a good that is the most sell-able? For many tribes, an early answer was shells.

Shells, especially ones that were carved and polished into jewelry beads, emerged as money-like assets thousands of years ago in multiple different regions. The utility was aesthetic: They could be fashioned into bracelets, made into belts, used as earrings, sewn into clothing, or hung in the hair. The advantage of shells in trade is that they are small, scarce, and long-lasting. And the specific advantage of putting them onto wearable strands is that they don't have to be carried in the hands, which makes them portable.

In his 2002 essay, "Shelling Out: The Origins of Money," Nick Szabo elaborates with extensive detail on the reasons why shells and other collectible proto-money likely came to be. As he summarized in his abstract:

> The precursors of money, along with language, enabled early modern humans to solve problems of cooperation that other animals cannot --- including problems of reciprocal altruism, kin altruism, and the mitigation of aggression. These precursors shared with non-fiat currencies very specific characteristics --- they were not merely symbolic or decorative objects.[^15]

On the Pacific coast of North America, tribes collected dentalium, which refers to long shells that look like teeth. They served a role as money and were traded as far inland as North Dakota. As naturally occurring tubes with openings on each end, dentalium were strung together in long strands, and certain tribesmen would have tattoos on their arms that they used as reference lengths when measuring strands in transactions. Some tribes specialized in collecting these from deep waters.[^16]

On the Atlantic coast, a different type of shell called wampum was used. These were made from clam shells and required extensive polishing and using a bow drill to create small holes in them for stringing together. The creators of these shells typically didn't consider them to be "money" as such. The beads were honored for having once been living creatures and were often used for ceremonial purposes, like crafting into priceless belts to honor treaties and other big events. But other tribes, and even colonialists, did begin to use these as money, or stores of value and status. Inland tribal groups collected them extensively.[^17]

In parts of Africa and Asia bordering around the Indian Ocean, cowrie shells were used as money for similar reasons. International traders would bring cowrie shells with them for trade, and there is extensive documented history of this practice up through recent centuries.[^18]

Although shells were among the most common proto-monies, there were other types of bead monies as well. Beads made from ostrich eggs, or strings of teeth from large predatory animals like lions or wolves, sometimes filled a similar role. In "Shelling Out," one of Szabo's examples is of the !Kung:

> Like most hunter-gatherers, the !Kung spend most of the year in small, dispersed bands and a few weeks of the year in an aggregate with several other bands. Aggregation is like a fair with added features --- trade is accomplished, alliances are cemented, partnerships strengthened, and marriages transacted. Preparation for aggregation is filled with the manufacture of tradeable items, partly utilitarian but mostly of a collectible nature. The exchange system, called by the !Kung *hxaro*, involves a substantial trade in beaded jewelry, including ostrich-shell pendants quite similar to those found in Africa 40,000 years ago.

As one might expect, the African continent is home to the oldest known beads. At the Blombos Cave archeological site in South Africa, small snail shells with tiny holes in them were found and were estimated to be 75,000 years old. The U.S. National Science Foundation reported on this find in 2004:

> Perforated shells found at South Africa\'s Blombos Cave appear to have been strung as beads about 75,000 years ago --- making them 30,000 years older than any previously identified personal ornaments. Archaeologists excavating the site on the coast of the Indian Ocean discovered 41 shells, all with holes and wear marks in similar positions, in a layer of sediment deposited during the Middle Stone Age (MSA).
>
> \"The Blombos Cave beads present absolute evidence for perhaps the earliest storage of information outside the human brain,\" says Christopher Henshilwood, program director of the Blombos Cave Project and professor at the Centre for Development Studies of the University of Bergen in Norway.
>
> The shells, found in clusters of up to 17 beads, are from a tiny mollusk scavenger, Nassarius kraussianus, which lives in estuaries. They must have been brought to the cave site from the nearest rivers, 20 kilometers east or west on the coast. The shells appear to have been selected for size and deliberately perforated, suggesting they were made into beads at the site or before transport to the cave. Traces of red ochre indicate that either the shell beads themselves or the surfaces against which they were worn were coated with this widely used iron oxide pigment.[^19]

Food decays, and so in a world without freezers, people don't have an incentive to keep much more food than they need. Similarly, spears and furs are bulky to carry around; beyond a certain point, there isn't much value to having too many extra spears and furs. Trading with other tribes with these things is difficult because each side needs to have precisely what the other side wants. But having carved and polished shell beads fixes the problem. They don't rot and they aren't bulky, so it's fine (and even desirable) to collect extra of them whenever peoples' other needs are met. They're nearly universally desired in a world with that basic level of technology. Even if someone doesn't like wearing them, their spouse or sibling or friend might. And they know members of most other tribes like them, which opens future trading opportunities.

Creating carved and polished shell beads was a very labor-intensive process. The shells first had to be collected by hand on the coast, and then depending on the type, they were carved, polished, and manually drilled into with a bow drill so that a thread could be run through them to affix them together or onto something else, making them into a useful ornament. Once made, these shell beads lasted a long time, and had a lot of value relative to their size and weight due to their attractiveness and the amount of work that it took to make them. If someone trades excess food for some shell beads, or spends surplus time creating shell beads, they could hold onto the shell beads for months or years until they come across something that they want or need and trade them for that thing. And in the meantime, they are wearable and aesthetically pleasing.

In other words, the shell beads serve as something that can be accumulated, that can augment or replace the need for flexible social credit, and that can replace the oral ledger --- at least when it comes to dealing with people that are not trusted or might never be seen again. Shell beads, as a nearly universally desirable and durable good, allow someone to trade with people even if they need nothing from them, because they can always just request shell beads that act as a placeholder until they do come across something they need or want. And they can always use more shells than whatever number they currently have, because they represent portable, stored-up value that they can trade away for resources in the future, either with their own bandmates or with other groups. Compared to food that decays, or furs and spears that are too bulky to hoard or carry, these small wearable shells arguably represent the invention of long-term savings technology --- meaning a way to convert surplus time or resources into a financial battery. People can keep some strands of shell beads on their wrists, some on their neck, some on their ankles, some in their hair, some as a belt, etc. People can put them on their kids or give them to their spouse. Each small piece of shell jewelry is intrinsically desirable and represents quite a bit of work.

In this role as the most sell-able ("salable") good, each strand of shell beads acts like one of Vito's unspecified future favors. Someone or some group that has collected a lot of shell beads by spending surplus time and resources to accumulate them (or who inherited them from the prior generation who did) now has plenty of value to offer if they need more immediate resources in the future. And unlike a favor, a strand of shell beads represents final settlement; its ongoing value does not depend on the memory of the one who received the favor.

In addition to someone simply enjoying wearing shell beads for their own aesthetic sake, shell beads were often a sign of status. Someone with a lot of shell beads had a lot of wealth, literally and socially. In this tribal context, if we see someone covered in beautiful shell belts, bracelets, necklaces, and sewn into their clothes, we can assume they must have provided a lot of value to others in the past to have accumulated so many shell beads, or that they are closely connected to other people that have. They are literally wearing a bunch of valuable stored-up favors on their person, and thus have enjoyed a significant period of surplus resources. This seems like a good person to get to know, to respect, and possibly to mate with. They're socially signaling that they've had a past filled with abundance.

In the study mentioned previously --- "Wealth Transmission and Inequality Among Hunter-Gatherers" --- the researchers noted that moveable property was usually individually owned in hunter-gatherer societies, while land tended to be more communally owned:

> Moveable material property, such as tools, clothing, and valuables, is generally treated as individual property and is often transmitted to descendant kin. In most foraging societies, however, such property can usually be manufactured by any adult of the appropriate gender, or obtained fairly readily; exceptions include items involving highly specialized manufacture or obtained through limited trade contacts, as well as wealth and prestige goods in some sedentary and less egalitarian societies.[^20]

Notably, "items involving highly specialized manufacture" and "prestige goods" are identified as among the types of property that are not readily obtainable. In other words, they have actual scarcity to them. The researchers went on to conclude that, while generally communal in many aspects, hunter-gatherer societies in general are not necessarily as egalitarian as we may imagine them to be:

> Indeed, as detailed in the introductory paper in this forum by Bowles et al., β=0.25 implies that a child born into the top wealth decile of the population is 5 times more likely to remain in the top wealth decile than a child whose parents were in the bottom decile. Even a β of 0.1 implies that a child born into the top wealth decile is twice as likely to remain there as is one born into the bottom decile. These results suggest that in hunter-gatherer populations, even those with extensive food-sharing and other leveling devices (Cashdan 1982), the offspring of those better off will tend to remain so, and conversely.[^21]

Unlike a literal ledger, no party in the transaction knows what the full ledger of shell beads looks like. If you and I are involved in a transaction, neither of us knows exactly how many shell beads exist in our region. But we do know their properties and how hard they are to make, and we know how often we see them worn by others, which helps us judge their rarity and what we could consider trading for them.

Shell beads, and commodity monies more broadly, serve as nature's decentralized ledger. By handing shells to someone else in exchange for something of value, we update the state of the ledger, and it is by physical possession that the full state of the ledger is maintained and updated. All participants understand and interact with parts of this natural ledger, but none of us know the full ledger state.

Who controls this ledger? For the most part, the answer to that question is "nature." And in practical terms, that means no human or group controls it. Making shell beads requires expending energy and time --- in the right way with the right materials --- which means nobody can cheat. Some coastal participants could spend their surplus time directly making shell beads, whereas other inland participants could spend their time accumulating other surplus resources, and then trading some of those surplus resources for shell beads. Either way, shell beads were a measure of surplus time and resources, a measure of savings and value, and often with a lot of ceremony attached to the process.

For the remaining part, or the edge case, the answer to who controls the ledger is that whoever has the most advanced technology controls the ledger. This commodity money ledger system works if all participants are somewhat equal in productive capability, which was the case for much of the world for thousands of years. If an extremely advanced civilization comes from across the ocean and has specialized metal tools, and they figure out how the shell money system works, then they can probably make an order of magnitude more shell beads per unit of work than anyone else. They can therefore devalue everyone's shells by flooding the market with them, and they can collect a lot of resources in the process because it will take time for the tribes to realize that this new civilization can churn out shells much faster than anyone else, and that shell beads in general are becoming less rare and less valuable over a period of months or years due to this rapidly expanding supply.

As we'll see in the next chapter, the story of commodity money is a story about technological progress. Various commodity monies serve as honest and fair ledger systems up until technology reaches a point where one group gains an unequal advantage, which then forces everyone else to adapt or lose.


## Footnotes

[^8]: Ignace Gelb, "Sumerian Language."

[^9]: William Goetzmann, *Money Changes Everything: How Finance Made Civilization Possible*, 15--25.

[^10]: Justin Pack, *Money and Thoughtlessness*, 51--70.

[^11]: See for instance Marcel Mauss, *The Gift*; Marshall Sahlins, *Stone Age Economics*; and Paul Einzig, *Primitive Money*.

[^12]: Elise Berman, "Avoiding Sharing."

[^13]: Paul Seabright, *The Company of Strangers: A Natural History of Economic Life*, 2--5, 91--105.

[^14]: Eric Smith et al., "Wealth Transmission and Inequality Among Hunter-Gatherers," 21.

[^15]: Szabo, "Shelling Out."

[^16]: Dror Goldberg, "Famous Myths of 'Fiat Money'," 962--963.

[^17]: Marc Shell, *Wampum and the Origins of American Money*.

[^18]: Bin Yang, "The Rise and Fall of the Cowrie Shell: The Asian Story."

[^19]: National Science Foundation, "Shell Beads from South African Cave Show Modern Human Behavior 75,000 Years Ago."

[^20]: Smith et al., "Wealth Transmission," 21.

[^21]: Smith et al., "Wealth Transmission," 31.

