# Chapter 2: **The Evolution of Commodities as Money**

As the prior chapter explored, humans in small kinship and friendship groups don't need money; they can organize resources among themselves manually, with informal oral ledgers at most. They can keep track of who offers a repeated surplus to the group and who always seems to be operating at a deficit. Within small groups, people naturally "solve the problem of barter" with flexible social credit before the problem of barter even comes up.

However, groups that regularly trade with outside groups, or develop farming and begin to reach larger static populations than the typical tribal size, inevitably start identifying and making use of some form of money, which gives them a more liquid, divisible, portable, and widely accepted accounting unit for storing and exchanging value with people they don't know. In addition to still using social credit systems, they also rely on nature's ledger, so that they can sidestep the double coincidence of wants that would otherwise reduce the success rate of trading.

The usage of collectible proto-monies, since they take so much labor to produce, often seems arbitrary to outsiders of that culture. Why spend so much time making shell beads, for example? Isn't that a waste of resources, in a harsh, low-technology, hunter-gatherer environment where every resource is valuable and where more than a third of children don't even make it to adulthood? Shouldn't surplus time be spent on something else? The answer is that this work is a good use of resources during periods of abundance, and ends up more than paying for itself, because a standardized and credible medium of exchange and store of value makes all other economic transactions more efficient.

As an economy becomes more complex, there are a greater number of possible combinations of barter between different types of goods and services. For example, if an economy produces five different products, then there are 10 different unique trading pairs. If an economy produces 20 different products, then there are 190 unique trading pairs. An economy with 100 different products has 4,950 unique trading pairs. At this point, most types of barter other than for the basics would be wildly inefficient.

So, if a society requires more complex or trustless interactions than flexible social credit will allow, then that society requires some standard unit of account --- or money --- that serves as one side of the trading pair with every other good or service.

Specifically, among the assets that a society trades, one or two of the most scarce, divisible, durable, portable, and liquid tend to rise to the top. An apple farmer that needs some tools (a blacksmith), meat (a cattle rancher), repair work (a carpenter), and medicine for her children (a doctor), can't spend the time going around finding individuals that have what she needs, that also happen to want a ton of apples at that moment. An extensive barter system like this between neighbors doesn't develop naturally. Instead, she simply needs to be able to sell her (highly seasonal and short-lived) apples for some durable and widely accepted savings unit that she can use to buy those things with over time as she needs them.

In 1776, Adam Smith discussed the emergence of money as a solution to the barter problem in his *Wealth of Nations.* Credit theorists object to this example and order of events around the topic of barter in general, but that objection and the broader debate around it are addressed in detail in Chapter 4 of this book. After Smith's exploration of the topic, commodity money as a detailed topic tends to be heavily emphasized by those in the Austrian school of economics, founded by Carl Menger in the 1800s, and further advanced by Ludwig von Mises, Friedrich Hayek, and many others.

In this way of thinking, money should be divisible, portable, durable, fungible, verifiable, and scarce. It also usually (but not always) has some utility. Different types of money can be thought of as having different "scores" along those metrics:

- Divisible means that the money can be sub-divided into various sizes that are suitable for different sizes of purchases.

- Portable means that the money is easy to move across distances, which means it must pack a lot of value into a small weight.

- Durable means that the money is easy to save across time; it does not rot or rust or break easily.

- Fungible means that individual units of the money don't differ significantly from each other; one is as good as any other.

- Verifiable means that the seller of the goods or services for the money can easily check that the money really is what it appears to be.

- Scarce means that the money supply does not increase quickly.

- Utility means that the money is intrinsically desirable in some way; it can be consumed or has aesthetic value, for example.

Summing those attributes together, money is the "most salable good" available in a society, meaning it's the good that is the most sell-able --- the most capable of being sold. Money is the good that is most universal, in the sense that people want it, or realize they can trade for it and then easily and reliably trade it for something else that they do want. In his article "On the Origin of Money," Menger described that an ideal money transports value across both space and time, meaning that it can be transported across distances efficiently or saved for spending in the future.[^22] In addition, a key aspect of salability is liquidity, meaning that someone should be able to buy or sell large amounts of it relatively easily, and without losing much value to wide price spreads or lack of sufficient trading volumes. Liquidity in many ways is a measure of acceptability: The more widely accepted and widely held something is, the more liquid the trading for it tends to be.

Scarcity is often what determines the winner between two competing commodity monies. However, it's not just about how rare the asset is. In fact, extreme rarity can be bad for liquidity and make a commodity into a bad (unsalable) form of money. An important concept to be familiar with here is the stock-to-flow ratio, which measures how much supply there currently exists in the region or world (the stock), divided by how much new supply can be produced in a year (the flow).

For example, gold miners add about 1.5% new gold to the estimated existing above-ground gold supply each year,[^23] and unlike most other commodities, most of the gold does not get consumed; it gets repeatedly melted and stored in various shapes and places.

Gold does not rot, rust, or corrode as readily as most other materials do. It is chemically inert and therefore barely forms any compounds. It can be re-melted countless times and can even be dissolved in certain types of acid and then filtered back out. It can be blown up and scattered, but those pieces don't rust into nothingness like other materials would, and therefore the pieces are retrievable. Other than trace amounts that are thrown out in electronic circuit boards or sunk to the bottom of the ocean in shipwrecks, most gold ever mined is still in human control (and even those lost gold amounts are technically retrievable, at the right price). It's practically indestructible.[^24]

The combination of continuously mining gold and rarely losing any of the mined gold has resulted in gold having a stock-to-flow ratio of about 100/1.5 = 67 on average, which is the highest stock-to-flow ratio of any commodity. The world collectively owns 67 years' worth of average annual production, based on estimates by the World Gold Council. The supply growth rate has varied between 1% and 2% over the past century, which is a remarkably low and narrow band.[^25] Even in the 1970s when gold went up by an order of magnitude in terms of its dollar price, it couldn't affect the annual supply growth as a percentage of existing holdings by much at all. Prior to that point, the only periods where the refined gold supply increased at an accelerated rate were when industrial societies found a new continent and explored easy deposits, or if they invented new techniques for profitably extracting previously uneconomical deposits.

If an asset has a monetary premium on top of its pure utility value, then market participants are strongly incentivized to try to make more of it. Only assets that are highly resistant to increases in supply relative to the total existing supply can withstand this challenge, and thus can become and remain widely accepted money on a global scale.

On the other hand, if an asset is so rare that barely anyone has it, then it may be extremely valuable if it has utility, but it has little use as money; it's not liquid and widely held or accepted, and so the frictional costs of buying and selling it are high. Certain atomic elements like rhodium for example are rarer than gold but have low stock-to-flow ratios because they are consumed by industry as quickly as they are mined. A rhodium coin or bar can be purchased as a niche collectible or store of value, but it's not useful as widely accepted societal money and therefore doesn't arise as such naturally. The same is true for meteorites or other unusually rare things. As of 2022 there have been 1,878[^26] known meteorites discovered in the United States, and there are tens of thousands that have been found in other jurisdictions, which makes meteorites rare and valuable collectibles but not good money. Things like rhodium bars or meteorites simply don't have enough liquidity or divisibility to be useful as money.

So, a durably high stock-to-flow ratio tends to be the best way to measure scarcity for something to be considered money --- along with the other attributes on the list above --- rather than absolute rarity. A commodity with a high stock-to-flow ratio is hard to produce, and yet a lot of it has already *been* produced and is widely distributed and held, because it either isn't rapidly consumed or isn't consumed at all. That's a relatively uncommon set of attributes and what allows something to be money rather than merely a collectible.

Throughout history various stones, beads, feathers, shells, salt, furs, fabrics, sugar, coconuts, livestock, copper, silver, gold, and other things have served as money. They each have different "scores" for the various attributes of money and tend to have certain strengths and weaknesses. It was often the case that at least two monies were widely used at a time because no single money could fulfill every role perfectly.

Salt for example is divisible, durable, verifiable, fungible, and has important utility, but is not very valuable per unit of weight and not very rare, so doesn't score very well for portability and scarcity. The word "salary" comes from the Latin word *salarium* which referred to a salt-denominated income.

Gold is the best among just about every metric and is the commodity with the highest stock-to-flow ratio by far. The one weakness it has compared to other commodities is that it's not very divisible. Even a small gold coin is more valuable than most purchases and is worth a tremendous amount of labor. It's the king of commodities. Gold, as an ideal form of ornamentation, is basically a more technologically advanced version of shell beads. Its most common application is to serve as wearable or displayable wealth across many different cultures. It is money that we can easily bring with us and that we can use to signal our social status to others.

For a large portion of human history, silver has been the winner in terms of everyday usage. It has the second-best score after gold across the board for most monetary attributes, including the second highest stock-to-flow ratio, but beats gold in terms of divisibility, since small silver coins are ideal for daily transactions. It's the queen of commodities. And like in the game of chess, the king may be the most important piece, but the queen is the most useful piece.

As a result, gold was often held by the wealthy as a long-term store (and display) of value and as a medium of exchange for very large purchases, while silver was the more tactical money, used as a store of value and a medium of exchange by most working people. A bimetallic money system was common in many regions of the world due to gold's limited divisibility, despite the challenges that come with that multi-money approach.

Why did gold and silver defeat all other commodity monies to reach the modern era as usable money? The answer is that these were the two that could maintain high enough stock-to-flow ratios against the rise of human technology, even with a substantial monetary premium placed on them. They could retain their rarity over time, while also being widely accepted, widely held, durable, portable, divisible, and re-combinable.

The purchasing power of a commodity money can be conceptually divided into two parts: utility value and a monetary premium above that utility value. The utility value is the actual usage of that commodity for an economic purpose (consumption or production), while the monetary premium is an additional value that it has because so many people hold it as a form of savings, for lack of anything better to hold. The difference between a normal commodity and a commodity money is that people holding units of a commodity money are not just using it for its end purpose; they are holding it as savings because it's a highly salable good that they can easily resell in the future. Non-monetary commodities such as crude oil are for the most part measured only in terms of their utility value. There is practical demand and there is production supply, and relatively few others are holding oil for any significant amount of time. The dominant commodity monies of a region such as gold, however, have excess demand on them from widespread holding by people who are not end users, which greatly increases the total market value of that commodity. People hold a gold coin not because they want to do anything with the coin, but because they know that gold has many purposes and that by holding some, they are saving value in something that has a lot of liquidity and global acceptability.

This monetary premium (this excess price above the utility purpose) serves as a massive and permanent advertisement for people to try to figure out how to make more of that commodity. Only the scarcest commodities, meaning those with the highest stock-to-flow ratios, can withstand this advertisement over the long run. Monetary premiums can be applied to other assets as well, such as waterfront properties or fine art, because they are often held more so as a form of savings than to be enjoyed for their own sake. The downside with that approach is that such non-monetary assets inherently lack the portability, liquidity, fungibility, and divisibility of gold and other monies.

Many people consider money to be a shared delusion. In this way of thinking, a society can pick anything it wants as money, as long as most of its members believe in it. Paperclips could be money, for example, if we all agree that they are. While this seems true at first, it's not sustainable. If the supply of that money can be rapidly expanded, then everyone's savings can be rapidly diluted. And a monetary premium provides a lot of incentive for people to make more of it, if possible. Therefore, if a money is not selected wisely within a society, it only takes a small number of individuals to break free from their society's shared delusion to realize that its money isn't scarce, and make a lot more of it to extract value from everyone else. Alternatively, people from a different society can exploit that society's shared delusion. Therefore, the only types of money that can maintain usage in a society for a long period of time are ones with a significant degree of genuine scarcity to them.

Shell money lasted thousands of years in various regions, but eventually became unworkable against the industrial revolution. Furs, livestock, salt, tobacco, and other monies also served their useful roles at various times, but the ever-growing technical prowess of civilization eventually made those unworkable as money as well. They worked until technology disallowed them from continuing to work. The following sections walk through several examples for this concept.

**Shells**

As previously described, shell money was used for long stretches of time in parts of the Americas, Africa, and Asia. In some areas it was used more ceremonially, and in other areas it was used more literally in the transactional sense as money.

The wampum variety of shell beads that was common on the east coast of North America was the more ceremonial variety by the original tribes that developed it. Nonetheless, New England colonialists incorporated it into their money system in the early 1600s, with a fixed exchange rate of a certain number of shells equaling their coins.[^27] Purple wampum was rarer and thus was given twice the value of white wampum.

Eventually the fixed exchange rate laws were repealed, and wampum was valued on a market basis. John Campbell opened the Campbell Wampum Mill in New Jersey in 1812, and with modern drilling techniques, they were able to mass produce wampum beads at a much faster pace than they could previously be produced at.[^28] John Jacob Astor of the American Fur Company purchased this industrially produced wampum and used it to trade for furs with indigenous populations in Canada.

In the long arc of time, shell money in all its forms and geographies across the world became unworkable against the power of industry. Metal tools and other technologies made shell money an unsuitable medium for storing value. In some areas to this day, the tradition of making wampum by hand is kept alive by descendants of the indigenous people that used it, returning it to its more ceremonial and nuanced purposes as a way of preserving cultural tradition.

**Tobacco**

In the early 1600s, Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina began using tobacco as money, including as government-decreed legal tender. Over time, however, problems began to emerge with that system that were similar to the industrialization of wampum shells.

Since tobacco had a monetary premium placed on it above its utility value, there was a massive incentive to plant more of it and to try to capture (and therefore eventually erode) that monetary premium.[^29] Unlike gold, tobacco doesn't have enough natural scarcity to prevent that monetary premium from being exploited and dissipated. The natural result of this monetary premium was a major increase in the supply of tobacco, and this led to major price inflation for goods and services in tobacco-denominated terms. In response to this excess supply of tobacco, colonial governments enacted restrictions on the planting of tobacco, such as by limiting production to certain groups, to create artificial scarcity in what is otherwise not scarce on its own.[^30] In other words, only groups favored by the government could act as the "tobacco money printer." This is clearly an imperfect solution, and a hard one to maintain indefinitely.

Another problem was that tobacco is not perfectly fungible. There are higher and lower qualities of tobacco. If all tobacco is valued at a certain exchange rate, then there is a strong incentive to spend the lowest quality tobacco locally, and to sell the high-quality tobacco overseas where it is more appropriately valued. As a result, warehousing began to occur, where tobacco would be stored and graded, with standardized paper claims issued against it. They therefore created a "tobacco standard" system. For the holder of the paper receipt, this created counterparty risk in addition to the existing risk associated with the devaluation of the underlying tobacco.[^31]

Overall, the problem with tobacco was that it could not withstand the invitation to produce more of it, and a monetary premium is a major invitation to try to create more of something. It's a very heavy burden for any commodity to carry. Gold has been able to withstand that challenge for thousands of years, but tobacco could not. Tobacco served a useful role for some time in the southern colonies because they were small and poorly developed in their early years and lacked sufficient specie, but the tobacco monetary system no longer made sense once they grew larger and more developed. Various attempts by government to prolong the useful life of this money delayed its inevitable demise for a period, but eventually the system became clearly unworkable relative to sounder types of money and was discarded entirely.[^32]

**Cocoa**

Throughout parts of central and southern America, civilizations used cocoa as money. This practice was in effect when Europeans arrived, and murals show that it dated back many centuries earlier.[^33] Cocoa beans are small, relatively fungible, and can be stored for a decent amount of time. Most importantly, people love the taste! These traits made cocoa a decent form of money.[^34]

Like many pre-industrial societies, these civilizations engaged in flexible social credit and barter, and that practice trends toward using one or two highly salable goods as a method to improve trading. One or two scarce and liquid goods tend to become money in contexts where credit is not sufficient. Aztecs also had copper money, with units being molded into the shape of a decorative hoe or decorative dull axe. Thousands of cocoa beans could be traded for one of these copper units, if someone needed to engage in larger transactions or store liquid wealth in a small and portable unit for a longer period.[^35]

When Europeans arrived in the Americas, they engaged in the use of cocoa and copper as money, but like other places in the world, this practice was eventually displaced by more scarce forms of money.

**Rai Stones**

Inhabitants of an island in the South Pacific called Yap used enormous stones as money. These "rai stones" (or "fei stones") were carved into circular discs of stone with a hole in the center, and came in various sizes, ranging from a few inches in diameter to over ten feet in diameter. Many of them were at least a couple feet across, and thus weighed hundreds of pounds. The biggest were over ten feet across and weighed thousands of pounds.[^36]

Interestingly, I've seen this example used by both an Austrian economist and an MMT economist. The reason that's interesting is because those two schools of thought have very different conceptions of what money is. Austrian economists tend to emphasize money as a commodity, whereas Chartalists (and MMT economists in their current form) tend to emphasize money as a public ledger.[^37] These views can be reconciled by understanding that commodity monies are being used as a ledger, with nature serving as the administrator of that ledger. That reconciliation is discussed more in Chapter 4.

What made these rai stones unique was that they were made from a special type of limestone that was not found on the island. Yap islanders would travel 250 miles to a neighboring island called Palau to quarry the limestone and bring it back to Yap.

They would send a team of many people to that far-away island, quarry the rock in giant slabs, and bring it back on wooden boats. Imagine bringing a multi-thousand-pound stone across 250 miles of open ocean on a wooden boat. Some people died in this process over the years. It required a tremendous amount of time, effort, and danger.

Once made into rai stones on Yap, the big ones wouldn't move. This is a small island, and all the stones were catalogued by oral tradition. An owner could trade one for some other important goods and services, and rather than moving the stone, this would take the form of announcing to the community that this other person owned the stone now.[^38]

In that sense, rai stones were a literal ledger system, and not really that different from our current monetary system. The ledger keeps track of who owns what, and this particular ledger happened to be orally distributed, which of course can only work in a small community.

By the time this was documented by Europeans, there were thousands of rai stones on Yap, representing generations of quarrying, transporting, and making them. Rai stones thus had a high stock-to-flow ratio, which is a main reason for why they could be used as money.

In the late 1800s, an Irishman named David O'Keefe came across the island and figured this out. And, with his better technology, he could easily quarry stone from Palau and bring it to Yap to make rai stones, and thus could become the richest man on the island, able to get locals to work for him and trade him various goods. An article for the *Smithsonian Magazine* by Mike Dash called "David O'Keefe: The King of Hard Currency" summarized it as follows:

> As the Irishman got to know Yap better, he realized that there was one commodity, and only one, that the local people coveted --- the "stone money" for which the island was renowned and that was used in almost all high-value transactions on Yap. These coins were quarried from aragonite, a special sort of limestone that glistens in the light and was valuable because it was not found on the island. O'Keefe's genius was to recognize that, by importing the stones for his new friends, he could exchange them for labor on Yap's coconut plantations. The Yapese were not much interested in sweating for the trader's trinkets that were common currency elsewhere in the Pacific (nor should they have been, a visitor conceded, when "all food, drink and clothing is readily available, so there is no barter and no debt"), but they would work like demons for stone money.[^39]

In essence, better technology eventually broke the stock-to-flow ratio of rai stones by dramatically increasing the flow. Foreigners like O'Keefe, armed with more advanced technology, could bring any number of them to the island, become the wealthiest people on the island, and therefore increase the supply and reduce the economic value of the stones over time.

However, locals were smart too, and they eventually mitigated that process. They began to assign more value to older stones (ones that were verifiably quarried by hand decades or centuries ago), because that subset remained scarce. Similar to how no matter how much new art is produced, Vincent van Gogh isn't making any more, and so his paintings tend to increase in price rather than get debased by new supply from other artists. Nonetheless, the writing was on the wall; rai stones weren't a great system for money anymore.

Things then took a darker turn. As further described in Dash's *Smithsonian* article:

> With O'Keefe dead and the Germans thoroughly entrenched, things began to go badly for the Yapese after 1901. The new rulers conscripted the islanders to dig a canal across the archipelago, and, when the Yapese proved unwilling, began commandeering their stone money, defacing the coins with black painted crosses and telling their subjects that they could only be redeemed through labor. Worst of all, the Germans introduced a law forbidding the Yapese from traveling more than 200 miles from their island. This put an immediate halt to the quarrying of fei, though the currency continued to be used even after the islands were seized by the Japanese, and then occupied by the United States in 1945.[^40]

Many of the stones were taken and used as makeshift anchors or building materials by Japanese invaders during World War II, reducing the number of stones on the island.

Rai stones were a notable form of money while they lasted because they had no practical utility other than for aesthetics. They were a way to display and record wealth, and little else. In essence, it was one of the earliest versions of a formal public ledger, since many of the stones didn't move and only oral records (or later, physical marks by Germans) dictated who owned them.

**Feathers**

Feathers were often used as money-like objects by tribes around the world. Majestic birds such as eagles or parrots, with unusually large or beautiful feathers, were collected by many cultures.

Sometimes these would have a more ceremonial value, such as eagle feathers used as headdresses among tribal leaders. Other times they would be collected more informally, simply for their beauty and interest, and then occasionally used in trades.[^41] A downside of feathers is that they are not very durable; over time it's easy to wear a feather down and ruin it --- especially if you're always on the move.

In the Solomon Islands, a form of feather currency was manufactured by tribal craftsmen into belt-like rolls. Each roll would consist of red feathers from hundreds of tiny scarlet honeyeaters, along with sap and other substances. This resulted in a more durable and unique form of feather money. Due to its nature, however, such a form of money is inherently limited in its fungibility and liquidity to a small jurisdiction, both geographically and culturally.

**African Beads**

Trade beads were used in parts of west Africa as money for many centuries, stretching back at least to the 1300s and prior. Various rare materials could be used, such as coral, amber, and glass. Venetian glass beads gradually made their way down to sub-Saharan west Africa through trade. One of the earliest documented references we have for this comes from Ibn Battuta, the famous Moroccan traveler of the 14th century whose exploratory trips took him all over Africa and Asia.

Emil Sandstedt, in his book *Money Dethroned: A Historical Journey* quoted Ibn Battuta, regarding Battuta's observation of West African money practices:

> A traveller in this country carries no provisions, whether plain food or seasonings, and neither gold nor silver. He takes nothing but pieces of salt and glass ornaments, which the people call beads, and some aromatic goods.[^42]

These were pastoral societies, often on the move, and the ability to wear your money in the form of strands of beautiful beads was useful. These beads maintained a high stock-to-flow ratio because they were kept and traded as money, while being hard to produce with their level of technology.

Eventually, Europeans began traveling and accessing West Africa more frequently, noticed this usage of trade beads, and exploited them. Europeans had glass-making technology and could produce beautiful beads with modest effort. So, they could trade tons of these beads for commodities and other goods (and unfortunately for human slaves as well).[^43]

Due to this technological asymmetry, Europeans devalued these glass beads by increasing their supply throughout West Africa and extracted a lot of value from those societies in the process. West Africans kept trading scarce local goods, ranging from important commodities to invaluable human lives, for glass beads that had far more abundance than they realized.[^44] As a result, they traded away their real valuables for fake valuables. Picking the wrong type of money like this can have dire consequences.

It wasn't quite as easy as one might suspect for the Europeans to accomplish this trick, however, because the Africans' preferences for certain types of beads would change over time, and different tribes had different preferences. This seemed to be like the experience with the rai stones, where once new supplies of rai stones started coming in faster due to industrial technology, the people of Yap began valuing old ones more than new ones. In this case, the West African tastes seemed to change based on aesthetics and scarcity. However, this practice also gave that form of money a lower score for fungibility, which reduced its reliability as a medium of exchange. Like rai stones, trade beads couldn't ultimately maintain their high stock-to-flow ratio in the face of technological progress, and therefore eventually were displaced as money.

**Japanese Invasion Money**

Although not a commodity money per se, Imperial Japan used weak money to acquire the scarce goods and services of regions that it had power over.

During World War II, when Imperial Japan invaded regions throughout Asia, they would confiscate hard currency from the locals and issue special paper currency in its place, which was referred to as "invasion money."[^45] These conquered peoples would be forced to save and use a currency that had no backing or supply scarcity and that ultimately lost all its value over time. This was a way for Japan to extract savings of their subjects while maintaining a temporary unit of account in those regions for economic transactions to continue to occur.

To a less extreme extent --- as I describe later in this book --- this is sadly what happens throughout many developing countries today: people constantly save in their local fiat currency that, every generation or so, gets dramatically debased, with their savings being siphoned off to the rulers and wealthy class.

**Grain**

In ancient Babylon, the silver shekel was used as a key monetary unit, but grain was also frequently used as a form of payment. Grain served as a food staple for the region, was often used to pay daily wages, and frequently served as a unit of account for other transactions.[^46]

The Code of Hammurabi, which is nearly four thousand years old, enforced grain as legal tender:

> 108\. If a wine-seller do not receive grain as the price of a drink, but if she receive money by the great stone, or make the measure of drink smaller for corn, they shall call that wine-seller to account, and throw her into the water.
>
> 111\. If a wine-seller give 60 KA of drink on credit, at the time of harvest she shall receive 50 KA of grain.
>
> 114\. If a man do not hold a debt of grain or money against a man, and seize him for debt, for each seizure he shall pay one-third mana of silver.
>
> 115\. If a man hold a debt of grain or money against a man, and he seize him for debt, and the one seized die in the house of him who seized him, that case has no penalty.[^47]

The difficulty of using an agricultural product for money is that the money supply changes dramatically throughout the year. Harvest season creates a lot of new grain money, and then throughout the rest of the year that grain supply is drawn down from people turning it into bread and beer. Farmers often relied on debt to make their payments, and then used their harvest (if successful) to pay off the debts to their creditors they had incurred throughout the non-harvest seasons.

In many societies like this, failed harvests could mean financial ruin for the farmer. The farmer and/or their family members could become debt-slaves. However, various kings would periodically forgive debts, or institute limitations on creditors either by excusing the debtor for certain events or by limiting the amount of servitude required to pay off debts.

> 48: If a man owe a debt, and a storm inundates his field and carry away the produce, or through lack of water grain have not grown in the field, in that year he shall not make any return of grain to the creditor, he shall alter his contract-tablet and he shall not pay interest that year.
>
> 117: If a man be in debt and sell his wife, son or daughter, or bind them over to service, for three years they shall work in the house of their purchaser or master; in the fourth year they shall be given their freedom.[^48]

Babylon provided among the earliest known examples of formalized weights and measures, formalized commodity money, formalized written credit, formalized custody contracts, and formalized legal tender. Kings set the foundational rules of commerce and addressed any structural imbalances in the system as they occurred throughout their reign, while temples served as the administrative systems for formalized commerce to occur.

**Video Game Money**

One of the fascinating outcomes of massively multiplayer online games is that they result in various unintended economic experiments. They basically re-run various economic environments with new rulesets, and this leads to case studies on emergent aspects of economies.

One well-known example of this was the emergent monetary formation in the online game *Diablo II*, which was an extremely popular multiplayer action-fantasy game released in the year 2000 that sold millions of copies (including to me as a teenager). Several people have analyzed the in-game economy over the years, but it was the author of *21 Lessons*,[^49] Gigi, who brought it to my attention with an article in 2022.[^50]

*Diablo II* had an in-game currency which (as we would expect in a fantasy setting) was called "gold." However, gold was programmed in such a way that inadvertently prevented it from being the best form of money in the game. Firstly, gold was abundant at high levels of play, but your game character could only carry a limited amount of it on their person. Secondly, whenever your game character died, you would lose a portion of the gold you were carrying, yet you could get all your other items back. Naturally with these limitations on gold, players wanted to store their wealth in valuable items instead.

Additionally, because it was a multiplayer game with many rare items (and ways to craft certain greater items from lesser items), players naturally wanted to trade with each other. There were druids, barbarians, paladins, sorceresses, and other classes of characters. Within those classes, each character could be customized differently, with multiple potential directions of skill development and gear. Therefore, some rare items that were useful to one player were not useful to another player, and a lively trading economy emerged as a result.

For barter to be successful, it requires satisfying a double coincidence of wants. If a barbarian and a sorceress meet up to trade items, it is likely that they will fail the trade. Perhaps he wants a mighty axe, and she wants a magical staff. Out of the hundreds of items in the game, what are the chances that they each will have specifically what the other wants?

To fulfill this need, a form of money other than in-game "gold" quickly emerged among the players. Naturally, some items inherently made for better money than other items due to their characteristics. Players had limits on how many item slots they may carry, and larger items took up more slots. So, a monetary item needed to be valuable relative to the amount of space it took up. Additionally, a monetary item needed be rather universally desirable; it couldn't be some niche item that only barbarians could use, but rather had to be something that most classes could use.

The answer in the first couple years of the game was that a rare ring called the Stone of Jordan ("SoJ" for short) became the widespread currency of *Diablo II*. The SoJ boosted the mana and all skills of a player who wore it, which made them useful to everyone, and especially to the various spellcaster classes for whom mana was a particularly important resource. A SoJ might or might not be the "best" piece of gear for a given character, but every character could make significant use of them, and for some characters it was indeed a top-tier item to wear. Beyond their use, however, SoJ's acquired a monetary premium, since many people would collect them as savings, and use them as a highly salable good for trading. They took up the minimum amount of space in terms of character carrying capacity, which gave them a high amount of value density. Rare weapons and gear were denominated in SoJs; a rare magical sword might be worth eight SoJs, and a rare magical bow might be worth five SoJs.

Therefore, a sorceress could acquire some rare items on her journeys, and sell them to other players for SoJs, which she would hold. If one day she meets a barbarian that happens to have the rare magical staff that she wants, she could trade the SoJs for the staff. The barbarian could then eventually find someone who has the mighty axe that he wants and trade the SoJs for it. That's much easier than trying to line up a direct trade of a specific magical staff for a specific mighty axe.

SoJs emerged naturally as money because they had the best characteristics of money out of the items in the game. They were not intended to be used as money by the game developers, and it's not as though the players got together in a meeting one day and arbitrarily picked them; through quick analysis and iteration, the fact simply emerged among millions of players that SoJs were the best in-game money. And once they became the game's money, SoJs had a depth of liquidity that other items didn't have. Many people had them as savings, and many people would accept them, and thus their salability was higher than that of other items. Most players wouldn't be able to cite the *The Wealth of Nations* or similar economic literature for their reasoning; they just intuitively understood that having an in-game money was useful to solve the problem of barter in a world without credit, and that rare, small, widely useful items were ideal for it.

The one shortcoming of SoJs is that they were quite valuable and not divisible. So, there were also items called "perfect skulls" that emerged as lesser money. They were small and widely useful, but not as rare. Five perfect skulls could be traded for a SoJ, and a varying number of SoJs could be traded for varying legendary magic weapons and gear. In other words, SoJs were like banknotes for big purchases, and perfect skulls were like coins for small purchases or change.

Eventually, players found bugs in the game that allowed them to duplicate SoJs, and so SoJs began flooding the market, and devaluing. The game developers attempted to identify the bugs and delete duplicated items, and so players would open the game and find that some of their SoJs had disappeared. SoJs ceased being good money beyond that point, like how many commodity monies were rendered obsolete by advances in technology. The "technology" of buggy duplication rendered SoJs into bad money.

When the *Diablo II* expansion came out, the game developers introduced additional items including runes. Runes could be inserted into various gear to make the gear more powerful and could be combined in specific ways to create entirely new gear. Runes were small, valuable, and widely useful, and there were different types with different rarities, which in practice could serve like differently sized banknotes. They emerged naturally as in-game money from that point on due to their high degree of salability.

This case study (and others like it) is basically an accelerated example of how monies can emerge in a society naturally due to their characteristics that make them the most salable good --- and then fall out of favor as conditions change.


## Footnotes

[^22]: Carl Menger, "On the Origin of Money."

[^23]: Nuno Palma, "The Real Effects of Monetary Expansions: Evidence from a Large-Scale Historical Experiment"; Saifedean Ammous, *The Bitcoin Standard: The Decentralized Alternative to Central Banking*, 28--29.

[^24]: Ammous, *The Bitcoin Standard*, 27--8.

[^25]: World Gold Council, "Above-Ground Stock."

[^26]: Randy Korotev, "Meteorite Numbers in the United States, Canada, and Mexico," Washington University in St. Louis.

[^27]: Claire Priest, "Currency Policy and Legal Development in Colonial New England," *The Yale Law Journal*, 1324--26; Glyn Davies, *A History of Money: From Ancient Times to the Present Day*, 40--41.

[^28]: Kristin Beuscher, "From Pasack to the Plains." *Northern Valley Press*, May 21, 2019.

[^29]: Milton Friedman, "Understanding Inflation," 3:01--5:28.

[^30]: Ron Mitchener, "Money in the American Colonies," *EH.net*.

[^31]: Sharon Ann Murphy, *Other People's Money: How Banking Worked in the Early American Republic*.

[^32]: Farley Grubb, "Colonial Virginia's Paper Money, 1755--1774"; Barry Eichengreen, *Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar and the Future of the International Monetary System*, 9--11.

[^33]: Stefania Moramarco and Loreto Nemi, "Nutritional and Health Effects of Chocolate," 134--35.

[^34]: Ingrid Fromm, "From Small Chocolatiers to Multinationals to Sustainable Sourcing: A Historic Review of the Swiss Chocolate Industry," 73.

[^35]: Dudley Easby, "Early Metallurgy in the New World," 77.

[^36]: Milton Friedman, *Monetary Mischief*, 3--7.

[^37]: William Luther and Alexander Salter, "Synthesizing State and Spontaneous Order Theories of Money."

[^38]: Friedman, *Monetary Mischief*, 4.

[^39]: Mike Dash, "David O'Keefe: The King of Hard Currency," *Smithsonian Magazine*, July 28, 2011.

[^40]: Dash, "O'Keefe."

[^41]: David Jones, *Native North American Armor, Shields, and Fortification*, 41.

[^42]: Emil Sandstedt, *Money Dethroned: A Historical Journey*, 43*.*

[^43]: Emil Sandstedt, "Tales of Soft Money --- The Trail of Beads," *Medium* May 26, 2019.

[^44]: Laure Dussubieux et al., "European Trade in Malawi: The Glass Bead Evidence."

[^45]: Dazmin Daud, "A Study on Two Varieties of \$100 Malaya Japanese Invasion Money (Pick #M8A)," 43.

[^46]: Goetzmann, *Money Changes Everything*, 59--69.

[^47]: Hammurabi, *The Code of Hammurabi, King of Babylon,* 37--39.

[^48]: Hammurabi, *Code of Hammurabi*, 27, 41.

[^49]: Gigi, *21 Lessons: What I've Learned from Falling Down the Bitcoin Rabbit Hole.*

[^50]: Gigi, "Bitcoin Is Digital Scarcity," DerGigi.com, October 2, 2022. See also Solomon Stein, "The Origins of Money in *Diablo II*."

